N W!
ET ORLD
what people are
really
doing
on the
INTERNET,
and what
it means
to you
DAVID H. ROTHMAN
“A considerable achievement. ”—William F. Buckley, Jr.
Current Events/Internet
“A considerable achievement. You find yourself wanting to
read NetWorld! even if you have no thought of baptism
into the great new scene. ” —William F. Buckley, Jr.
“David H. Rothman has done the best job yet of illustrating
exactly how and why the Internet will change the texture of daily
life. Most discussion of the information age is full of airy
generalizations. NetWorld! is full of specific, amusing, often racy
illustrations of how people around the world have already put
the Net’s possibilities to work. This is a very useful and
entertaining book. ” —James Fallows Washington editor of the
Atlantic Monthly
Exploring Life on the Net

Praised by the New York Times For his entertaining style, David H.
Rothman has written a lively, revealing, and sharp-eyed account of
life on the Net. Read how a handsome young librarian in Adelaide,
Australia, got engaged to a Kansas City woman he’d never met(cid:0)—
except online. Discover why net. censors and other interlopers could
eventually cost America billions of dollars. Learn how an Anglican
priest uses the Internet to “hear” confessions and help keep in touch
with his flock. From electronic libraries to the digitized cadaver of an
executed killer, NetWorld! covers everything that’s happening on the
Net.
Whether you surf nightly or know the Net only secondhand,
NetWorld! will shed new light on the cultural phenomenon that is
engrossing millions around the world.
Prima Publishing

NetWorld!
What People
Are Really
Doing on the Internet,
and What It Means to
You
David H. Rothman
PRIMA PUBLISHING

With 88s to Carly,
my dearest company
in life and on the ’Bahn.
© 1996 by David H. Rothman
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage or
retrieval system, without written permission from Prima Publishing,
except for the inclusion of quotations in a review.
PRIMA PUBLISHING and colophon are trademarks of Prima
Communications, Inc.
Cover design by the Dunlavey Studio
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rothman, David H.
Networld!: what people are really doing on the Internet, and
what it
means to you/David H. Rothman.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN O-7615-0013-8
1. Internet (Computer network) I. Title.
TK5105.875. I57R69 1995
004.6’7—dc20
95-5287
CIP
95 96 97 98 99 AA 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Printed in the United States of America
How to Order:
Single copies may be ordered from Prima Publishing, P. O. Box
1260BK, Rocklin, CA 95677; telephone (916) 632-4400. Quantity

discounts are also available. On your letterhead, include information
concerning the intended use of the books and the number of books
you wish to purchase.

Contents
A Note to Visitors ( and Natives ) v
Acknowledgments vii
1 The Terrain 1
2 Business on the Net:
From White Rabbit Toys to “Intel Inside” 27
3 EntertaiNet: A Few Musings on Net. Rock,
Leonardo da Vinci and Bill Gates,
Bianca’s Smut Shack, and David Letterman
in Cyberspace 80
4 Pulped Wood versus Electrons:
Can the Print World Learn to Love the Net? 105
5 Wired Knowledge:
When They Let a Murderer Loose on the Internet 172
6 Governments and the Net:
Making Sure Orwell Was Wrong 208

7 The Electronic Matchmaker 291
Notes 327
Index 335

A Note to Visitors
( and Natives )
Everyone in NetWorld! is real, even me. Chapter 1 tells how to reach
some good people who let their electronic addresses go on the Web
site for this book.
In a few cases—most notably “Sue” and “Greg” in Chapter 7—I’ve
guarded my subjects’ privacy with aliases and changes of identifying
details. Asterisks show up after the first occurrences of their revised
names.
Please note, too, that I’ve smoothed out people’s informal online
prose to accommodate the printed page. A “smiley” on the Net is a
good quick way to show a smile or frown; but I couldn’t think of
anything uglier in print than a series of symbols such as:-). So even
in quotes, I’ve used them sparingly.
I wish Mark Twain were alive and cruising the Internet at 28. 8
kilobits per second; I’d love to see how he’d have handled
net. dialect.
David Rothman,
rothman @ clark. n
et
Alexandria,
Virginia

Acknowledgments
Alison, step to the front! Alison Andrukow, a graduate student at
Queen’s University in Kingston, Ontario, served as my chief
researcher on this project—discovering a number of goodies ranging
from Bianca’s Smut Shack to arcane, Net-related policy studies.
Jennifer Basye Sander, my editor at Prima Publishing, working with
associate acquisitions editor Alice Anderson and the project editor,
Steven Martin, provided many suggestions, as did the publisher, Ben
Dominitz. The latter promoted this book, so to speak, from Digital
America to Digital World, and in time the title NetWorld! also came
from Ben. Surprise, you guys! You thought you were getting a
general book on computer technology, but wisely you let me get
caught up in the Net. Thanks!
Bill Adler and Lisa Swayne of Adler and Robin Books, joined by Nick
Anis, agented this book. Nancy Daisywheel Breckenridge was the
transcriptionist.
Finally, I want to thank the many people who gave their time by way
of e-mail or otherwise. Lest I forget some important ones here, I
won’t list any names. But by way of the references in the book itself,
readers will learn the identities of many.

CHAPTER
ONE
The Terrain
A color photo lights up my computer screen when I hit the return
key, and, in big, bold Times Roman letters, I see the latest from the
Internet:
Playboy Is Traveling the Info Highway
Looking for Women for a Special
“Girls of the Net” Pictorial
Sitting atop a pile of books, a most ungeekish model looks flawlessly
nubile, as if part of a virtual reality tableau conjured up for Hugh
Hefner himself. Playboy’s message is clear: What counts isn’t
mastery of Telnet, Gopher, Lynx, or other Net voodoo. Candidates
should mail or e-mail “a recent full-length body photo in a two-piece
bathing suit or less and a clear face shot.”
The same day a famous hacker named Cliff Stoll goes on a
Washington radio station to promote his book Silicon Snake Oil,
which says the Internet steals too much time from true learning and
life.
For better or worse—mostly better in my opinion, egalitarian that I
am—the Internet has Arrived.
A quarter-century ago scientists dreamed up a predecessor of the
network to let computers jabber to each other across the United

States, even after a nuclear attack. Fearless professors followed with
electronic talk on topics ranging from biology to poetry.
Now it’s as if everyone is on the Internet—not just Playboy but
Penthouse, some Arizona lawyers who love to inflict junk ads on the
innocent, a Florida manicurist, Democratic and Republican stalwarts,
thousands of college freshmen, punk teenagers, and elementary
schoolers in London, Singapore, Minnesota, Nova Scotia—you name
it. In one way or other, the Net ties in to smaller networks ranging
from local, bulletin board-style systems to America Online,
CompuServe, Prodigy, Delphi, GEnie, Bitnet, Bix, e World, and MCI
Mail.
Fans of David Letterman and Jay Leno, the world’s most famous talk-
show rivals, are even duking it out online. The cyberspace section of
Newsweek regularly lists the hottest attractions of the Internet—for
example, the best sites on the World Wide Web, the multimedia area
where you can see pictures and hear sound.
Hollywood is gambling on a movie called The Net, and Time and
Newsweek have done several cover stories. Could the Time curse be
at work here? Is everything else downhill, now that the Net has
landed on The Cover? Not if you go by the stats. Internet
demographers love to squabble about the exact number of people
on the Internet, but at the very least, some 25-30 million can reach
it by way of electronic mail; and in a few years, if the braver
prophets are right, hundreds of millions may be wired in. For the
snobs, of course, the old cachet is gone. A humor columnist says the
Net is like citizens band radio with typing.
Is the Internet, then, about to become a 500,000-channel
wasteland? Just what are all these millions really doing on the Net?
Some politicians would have you think that a disturbing number of
Netfolks are busy corrupting the morals of minors, and shouldn’t we
ban smut from the public areas of cyberspace? And if you believe
some American security bureaucrats, the Net might turn out to be a
haven for spies and dope dealers. “Shouldn’t Washington,” they

more or less ask, “be able to snoop on pervs and subversives who
scramble their messages?”
The counterrevolution has begun, and I feel grouchy.
Everyone is trying to reinvent the Internet in his or her own image,
even if, with these changes, the Net would no longer be the Net.
What’s really pathetic is the ignorance of the would-be meddlers.
Censoring the Net would be about as successful as trying to dam the
Pacific. The same decentralization that made the Net more nuke-
resistant, in the Cold War days, makes it harder to control. And how
can Washington sell the Net on Fed-friendly chips for coded
messages when scores of powerful encryption products are on sale
in Russia and the rest of Europe?
At the same time, certain writers are now attacking the Internet as
Cold and Heartless, or for other sins; some are even Pulling the Plug,
at least temporarily, to protect their delicate brains against
Information Overload.
“Don’t make me go back!” J. C. Hertz recalls telling her editors when
they wanted her to log back on the Net to wind down a book called
Surfing the Internet. “Please, don’t make me go back there.”
Stephen L. Talbott, a computer editor and author of The Future Does
Not Compute, proclaims that he “immediately felt very good” when
he Unplugged. Bill Henderson of the Push Cart Press says he’ll
publish a book with “cries from the heart about what electronics has
done to people.”[1.1]
Perhaps a new literary genre is aborning—that of the Snubbites, the
new Luddites[1.2] who feel all Netted Up. The definition might go
something like this:
Snubbite:—n. One who, partly out of snobbery, partly out of
boredom, partly out of sheer contrariness, snubs the computer
technology that could help millions of others.
A typical Snubbite is upper-middle class and very possibly Ivy
League. Snubbites could afford computer and Internet connections—
or more likely enjoyed them at others’ expense—years before

average people were even allowed on the Net. Often Snubbites live
near large libraries or can catch up with books easily enough in
other ways. Snubbites may have already used the Net to help stock
up on their quota of friends and professional contacts. Most
Snubbites are harmless and even charmingly eccentric; they worry
me only when they start confusing their own needs and non-needs
with those of society at large.
Cliff Stoll himself is very much on the Internet (“I still love my
networked community”) even now; to this day, I suspect, he truly
enjoys seeing people home-brew their own machines. But in
stretches of his book he could almost be mistaken for a Snubbite
anyway, based on sheer fervor. “It is an overpromoted, hollow world,
devoid of warmth and human kindness,” Stoll writes of cyberspace,
and goes on to say that nets address “few social needs or business
concerns” and threaten “precious parts of our society, including
schools, libraries, and social institutions.” He complains, “No birds
sing.”
Have I been hallucinating? The Internet isn’t Woodstock, the
Vatican, or an aviary, but it is bringing together people for religion,
education, business, love, and suicide prevention. Just what is Stoll
writing about? Does the Net have an evil twin? Jews, Moslems,
Lutherans, and Catholics—they are all using the Net to exchange
prayers or electronic newsletters. Up in Canada an Anglican priest
will even take confessions via e-mail. I doubt he’d agree with the
author of Snake Oil.
Nor, I suspect, would the members of Walkers in Darkness.
Walkers is a mailing list for people with chronic depression, and each
week more than 300 messages whiz across the Net from Australia to
Israel, from South Africa to California. I’m not depressed, but
someone close to me is, and she spends hour after hour with her
laptop, gazing at the blue-and-white on the screen, reading scores of
messages, keeping up with the gossip about people and drugs,
wondering what she would do without her Net connection. Being
depressed is like kayaking or hang gliding: You won’t die
immediately if you skip the homework, but in a pinch you’ll stand a
much better chance if you’ve gone far beyond the basics. Walkers is

in the grand tradition of the Net. Its members don’t blindingly trust
authority figures—their own shrinks—and they are reaching out to
other patients and to an online psychiatrist. Tell us, Ivan, some
Walkers ask, is Parnate as good a drug as it’s cracked up to be?
What about Nardil? Can you take it without your body swelling up?
“Ivan” is a well-credentialed psychopharmacologist in New York
City who helps out for free. Dr. Ivan Goldberg doesn’t prescribe
drugs for people online, but he will report his own experiences with
them after many years of practice. He has a knack for coming up
with angles that patients’ own doctors might miss. After months on
Prozac, a man found his work slipping. Ivan Goldberg told him of a
new way—successful here, it turns out—to treat the problem.
Goldberg is online two hours a day “as a way of paying back for
the thirty-plus good years I have had from my work with depressed
people.”[1.3] After several years on the Net helping virtual support
groups, he has won the respect of hundreds and perhaps even
thousands.
Still, Walkers compare notes with each other and don’t accept
even Ivan Goldberg’s opinions automatically. Just as if they were
talking over the office watercooler, they weigh the validity of the
information themselves. But what a collection of facts! When a new
antidepressant shows up in Canada or the United Kingdom, Walkers
learn about it many weeks before the news reaches the daily papers
in the States, assuming that word makes their daily newspapers at
all.
Many of the best conversations, however, aren’t about drugs or
the merits or perils of electroconvulsive shock treatments. They’re
about other Walkers. Remember the gay Walker in Iowa who was so
quick to welcome newcomers and answer questions? Well, here’s his
obit: Died of complications from diabetes. How about the fellow on
the East Coast, the programmer who never logs on with a name? Is
he okay, after his last suicide attempt? Is somebody going to drop by
to visit him in the hospital? What about such-and-such’s cat? How’s
your new girlfriend? Is your landlord being reasonable? The
questions and answers fly across the wires. Walkers may not be as
famous a virtual community as The WELL, Echo, and similar bulletin

board systems with Net and media connections, but it’s hardly as if
the luminaries of those places enjoy a monopoly on Caring.
Later that morning I hear Cliff Stoll push his book on WAMU radio.
It’s a slaughter; the call-ins run against him by at least five to one. I
even feel a little sorry for him until I remember that the
technophobes at many bookstores may outnumber the technophiles.
The full title of the book is Silicon Snake Oil: Second Thoughts on
the Information Highway, and it should be just the ticket for
Luddites and Snubbites with spare change. I myself have Second
Thoughts about his Second Thoughts. Early on in his book he says:
“I look forward to the time when our Internet reaches into every
town and trailer park.” But his true emphasis comes through. Just
how much of a technopopulist is he in the end when he claims that
networks will “isolate us from one another” and “work against
literacy and creativity?”
What’s really freaky is that a woman from Walkers or a similar
discussion group—out of all the thousands on the Net—calls up The
Diane Rehm Show and ever so politely shreds the arguments that
Stoll has made in Oil. A few years ago he wrote The Cuckoo’s Egg, a
wonderful book about his battles against errant hackers, and parts of
Snake Oil do ring true, but oh how wrong he is about the more
cosmic issues. Confronted with the Walkers-style example, Stoll
acknowledges that, yes, maybe the Net could be of use to people
who need support. After all, the very anonymity he’s assailed can
work in favor of honest dialogue. Exactly. One of the glories of
Walkers, however, is that depressed people can be as open or
nameless as they want. What’s more, they can even go Face to Face.
Several Walkers near me, for example, will spend hours and hours
talking in person with others dogged by this scourge of Lincoln and
Churchill.
Dave Harmon is the man behind the Walkers list. He’s a twenty-
eight-year-old Harvard grad, bearded, bespectacled, and a little on
the heavy side, as he describes it. I learn that he works as a
programmer for a company that writes software to use with mice—
the computer kind. His depression is moderate. Come the middle of

the night, he may wake up in a cold sweat; he can also suffer
flagging energy.
Several years ago Harmon was crouched in a Boston bus shelter,
enjoying a break from a crowded but rainy New Year’s Eve
celebration, when he took out a notebook and wrote a poem. “I am
the Walker in Darkness,” it read in part, “I am the bringer of light.”
The next day Harmon called the company that had hooked him into
the Internet—he wanted to start a list for depressed people
interested in art and magic. “The thing that makes the Net so
powerful is that you don’t have to get into a big deal to start a minor
newsgroup or a mailing list.” The newsgroups and the mailing lists
can precisely reflect Netfolks’ interests, loves, and fears—much more
closely than, say, CBS or the New York Times, or even niche
programs on cable.
Oklahoma City and the
Ban-the-Bomb-Manual Panic
A citation for The Terrorist’s Handbook
popped up on my screen a minute after I
started a search of the World Wide Web
under the word “explosives.” I apparently
would be able to make “book bombs,”
“lightbulb bombs,” “phone bombs.”
Trying to retrieve the Handbook some
weeks later, I read the following: “Are you
sure this resource exists?” Cute. The heat is
on. Handbook-style items caught the
attention of the U. S. Senate after sickos blew
up a federal building in Oklahoma City and
killed 160 people. The response in effect was:
“Ban the bomb manuals—from the Net and
otherwise!” and as of this writing, it looked as
if such sentiments might end up as law. Still,

a little problem arose in the case of The
Terrorist’s Handbook on the Net. The material
was coming to me from Lysator, a respected
academic computer society at Linköping
University in Linköping, Sweden. Last I knew,
the U. S. Senate did not enjoy jurisdiction over
its counterparts in Stockholm.
The Swedish computer that stored The
Terrorist’s Handbook, however, contains
megabyte after megabyte of valuable material
on computing and other subjects, and the
electronic librarians didn’t want to anger the
university. So out of prudence, they
voluntarily removed the bomb manual after
hysterical stories appeared in the press. The
Handbook wasn’t worth the fuss.
Perhaps in other cases Washington will use
diplomacy with other countries to unplug
Handbook-style items. But no one should
count on this approach working in the end.
Inevitably the same material will be secretly
making the rounds of obscure electronic
bulletin board systems, as opposed to the Net
itself. As if that isn’t enough, Washington has
unwittingly given out instructions for bomb-
makers by way of the tax-financed Blaster’s
Handbook from the Forestry Service in the
U. S. Department of Agriculture. Even The
Encyclopedia Britannica has printed material
on explosive making.
Most disturbing of all, Constitutional issues
arise here. We don’t need the government to
restrain free speech. As writer Brock N. Meeks
wrote in his CyberWire Dispatch newsletter,
Senator Dianne Feinstein’s proposal was “a
break in the dike.” It was “the trickle that

could become a river of regulatory hammers
meant to turn the rough-and-tumble, open
and free-flowing online discourse into
something with all the appeal and intellectual
acumen of tofu.”
Newsgroups are a bit like local bulletin board systems except that
some newsgroups reach hundreds of thousands of people around
the world. Mailing lists are more intimate than newsgroups since you
usually need to sign up for them electronically before you receive the
messages.
“The funny thing,” Harmon says of freshly created mailing lists, “is
that you never know what will result. What I found was that most
depressed people couldn’t produce that much art and mysticism, but
they were interested in supporting each other, and I looked at that
and let it go on its own.”
A seventy-eight-year-old widow in the American South discovered
Harmon’s list. She was the first in her family, after several
generations of mental illness, to seek psychiatric help. People from
Singapore have popped up, too, reporting how they were
stigmatized as lazy by people unable to understand the energy-
sapping qualities of the disease. Walkers tell of spouses complaining
about the loss of sex drive from depression or medications. Simply
put, Harmon’s list has not just helped people cope with a disease,
but it has also helped those who can’t understand it. And as shown
by the Singaporean example, geography has been inconsequential
for the most part. “When you’re depressed,” Harmon says, “it
doesn’t matter where you’re from, you’re still depressed.”
What’s more, Walkers can log on as often or seldom as they want.
Frequently the depressed feel all “peopled up,” so they may flee into
their rooms and close the blinds when visitors approach. But with
Walkers messages, all they need do is press the delete key. The
Internet isn’t just a medium of special benefit to the deaf; it’s also

one for the seriously depressed, many of whom, if made Netless,
might try to do without any company offline.
As with thousands of other Net lists, people come and go, some of
them overwhelmed by the sheer volume of messages; Stoll is right
to characterize the Internet as like trying to drink water from a fire
hydrant. But a core of stalwarts remain enthusiastically on Walkers,
and along with Harmon and Goldberg, they’re rather small-townish
in cyberspace in the best of ways. I ask about the East Coast Walker
with suicidal tendencies. Harmon says that by the time the
supportive messages reached the man, the programmer had already
called 911 and gone to the hospital to have his stomach pumped.
But, yes, Harmon says, Walkers has indeed saved lives. “A more
usual situation is that someone is considering suicide and issues an
appeal to Walkers for help. They’ll say something to the effect that
‘It’s not worth it, and nothing I do ever works, and I’m probably
bothering you with this note.’ People respond to it and sometime call
the person by phone if the number is available.” If the number isn’t,
Harmon and other Netheads will try to use their knowledge of the
Internet to track it down. “We don’t breach privacy unless there
really is a suicide threat, and sometimes people’s accounts may be
on services where we can’t find them. More usually, various people
may send their own phone numbers either privately or to someone
or to the list, so that other members can reach them.
“The Internet,” he cautions, “is not always a fast-rescuer—you
may be lucky to get same-day service. In the programmer’s case his
note didn’t even get to my list for an hour, much less get sent out to
all the members. I found out about his note by getting a midnight
phone call!”
Still, Harmon sees the Net as a godsend for ongoing support and
as a crisis aid even if the help isn’t always immediate. Goldberg
agrees: “It’s mobilized people to all kinds of interventions.”[1.4]
“I’m sitting here with a knife in my hand,” wrote a community
college student asking for support from Walkers. “Don’t worry, I’m
not going to kill myself—just hurt myself a little. I just feel as though
I deserve pain.” She went on to tell how she had been in the
National Honor Society in high school, gone on to an honors

program at Loyola University for several years, then had been forced
to leave. “I used to be strong, brilliant, and ambitious and now I am
stupid and manic depressive. It just hurts so much. So I guess that’s
why I’m cutting on my wrists tonight.” She told me when I wrote to
ask about her condition—improved—that “I would be lost without
Walkers.”
A near-suicide in Santa Clara, California, aided by the newsgroup
alt. support. depression, recalls: “I was so close it was amazing.”
Medical debts had overwhelmed him. He was a single father and his
boss had put him on probation after child care gobbled up too much
work time. In tears he began his note: “It doesn’t really matter any
more.” A New York woman saw the note and begged people online
to help. Hundreds of messages came over the Net from as far as
Japan. Tracked down despite his unsigned post, the California man
received help not only from a colleague at work but also from police.
“Something snapped,” he recalls, “and I just realized that there were
a lot of people there who cared.”[1.5]
Madness, another self-help group on the Net, is a mailing list for
people who suffer drastic mood swings, hear voices, and see visions.
Now, says Sylvia Caras, who runs the list, they can use the Net to
carry on a dialogue with federal mental health officials. The Net
offers a very real voice for those the world might otherwise ignore.
I could go on forever about support groups on the Net. Whether
you’re short or extra tall, anorexic or 300 pounds, a victim of cancer
or of child abuse, the Internet teems with people wanting to share
their experiences with you—a task made much easier through the
efficiencies of the Net, which have brought the cost of electronic
mail down so much. I bristle when I hear people talk about the
Internet as worthless unless big profits await megaconglomerates.
The activities of support groups and other virtual communities may
not show up in any country’s gross domestic product, but in the
aggregate they’re just as valuable as anything to emerge from AT&T
or Time Warner.
May I emphasize that the Net is far, far more than a mental health
clinic? It’s a place, too, for political activists, boaters, golfers,
motorcyclists, gun owners, gourmets, football fans, baseball

enthusiasts, parents and teachers, writers and readers of many
genres, pilots, airline passengers, amateur radio operators, and
reggae lovers. All have their own niches, which is just what you’d
expect with more than 12,000 newsgroups.
While the clueless are arguing over whether the Net has value,
people like John Schwartz already know it does. Recently he
wondered about lyrics by a singer and songwriter named Liz Phair.
Just how did they go? Some of the biggest fun came from his hunt
online. He tracked down at least five different Web areas—“digital
fan magazines”—devoted to Phair. “Some had photos, some had
biographical information, and a couple had song lyrics.” And yes, he
found the lyrics he wanted, and in their full, unprintable glory.
“Useless? Probably. Satisfying? You bet.” And Schwartz went on:
“Think of all the stuff that you’d find in your public library if you
pulled something off the shelf. A lot of it would be ‘useless’ for your
own needs—tons of mediocre fiction, outdated information, and silly
things. But would anybody say that it proves that libraries are
worthless?”[1.6]
Other Net activities also suggest that Snake Oil is self-descriptive.
A Michigan couple has started a virtual toy store complete with
pictures of their staffers as children and service of the kind you’d
expect from L. L. Bean; their first order came from Brazil (see
chapter 2: Business on the Net: From White Rabbit Toys to “Intel
Inside”). Out in California two young techies are giving hundreds of
young musicians a break through a much-needed project called the
Internet Underground Music Archives (chapter 3: EntertaiNet: A Few
Musings on Net. Rock, Leonardo da Vinci and Bill Gates, Bianca’s
Smut Shack, and David Letterman in Cyberspace). Just throw $100
their way and, for a year, you can post a sample of your music on
the Net and perhaps stir up sales of old cassettes and CDs.
At the same time that Stoll grouses that the Internet is unedited,
scores of dailies and weeklies are on the Net to one extent or
another (chapter 4: Pulped Wood versus Electrons: Can the Print
World Learn to Love the Net?). So’s Time magazine. Random House,
Macmillan, and Time Warner are there, too, posting samples from
various books, and soon people at home will be able to send credit

card numbers securely over the Net and dial up the complete texts
of bestsellers and other books. Even now you just might be reading
NetWorld! off a screen rather than from pulped wood.
Meanwhile, a digitized cadaver on the Internet may help
revolutionize the study of anatomy ( chapter 5: Wired Knowledge:
When They Let a Murderer Loose on the Internet ), and in Canada,
leather-jacketed teenagers are using the Net to develop their
reading and writing skills.
A Mini Jargon Guide
 Electronic Mail or e-mail. You can use the
Net and other networks to send messages to
your friends in Peoria or Melbourne—
anywhere, in fact, where Internet
connections go, from Alaska to the South
Pole. An electronic mailbox is just like the
physical equivalent. It’s a little storage area
where your messages pile up for you to
retrieve when you want.
 File Transfer Protocol, or FTP. It’s a means
to send or receive files from one computer
to another.
 Gopher. This program lets you track down
information on the Net. The word Gopher
also alludes to certain Gopher-style
collections of computer files. Different
Gophers connect to each other through
items on menus. You might start looking at
an article on water pollution from a
computer in Washington, D. C., see a
mention of an African river, click on that
menu choice with your mouse or otherwise
select it, and end up at a computer in
Johannesburg.

 Internet Relay Chat. It’s like a huge party
line except that people are typing rather
than talking. You can open up private areas,
too, and reach just one person.
 Mailing Lists. To be a bit simplistic, they’re
just like regular electronic mail, except that
a number of people share messages, to
which you can typically respond privately or
with the entire list. Some lists, however, let
only the moderator send out messages. Via
Usenet, some mailing lists appear as
newsgroups.
 Newsgroups. These are the bulletin board
systems of the Net, in effect. Almost anyone
can post messages there and potentially
reach hundreds of thousands of people—far
more than on most mailing lists, since
people can read newsgroups without
subscribing. The newsgroups are part of a
service called Usenet, which reaches BBSs
around the world, not just the Internet. No
one owns this anarchy, and I wouldn’t want
it any other way.
 Telnet. Without leaving my regular keyboard
I can operate a computer at Oxford
University or the University of California by
way of a procedure called Telnet. I’m
remotely controlling the machines at the
other end.
 The World Wide Web. It’s the area of the
Net that not only lets you read text but also
see pictures, hear sounds, and even take in
short clips from movies. Like Gophers, sites
on the World Wide Web connect with each
other. A program that lets you navigate the
Web is known as a browser. Among the

more popular browsers are Mosaic,
Netscape, and Lynx (the latter, alas, won’t
let you instantly enjoy pictures).
Also, the Net, in the opinion of many, is mocking Orwell’s
predictions (chapter 6: Governments and the Net: Making Sure
Orwell Was Wrong). Some serious threats remain—such as the
efforts of American bureaucrats to make the Net more friendly to
snoopy cops—but 1995 is a long way from 1984. What’s more, the
Internet doesn’t offer just sex.
Love, too, can thrive. The persistent may indeed find wives and
husbands on the Net (chapter 7: The Electronic Matchmaker).
This all happens on my Internet—anyway the one I’ll describe
here. Let me offer an inevitable caveat, however: The Net is too vast
for one writer to cover everything. So I won’t bother with Internet
Relay Chat, where you instantly see the other people’s typing. As a
temporary habitué of these regions, J. C. Hertz started to regard the
Internet as “a Sartrean hell—too many people talking at one
time.”[1.7] Yes! Net chat brings Hemingwayesque accounts from
witnesses to Japanese earthquakes or Russian coups, and I’m happy
it’s around for the aficionados, especially net. lovers, who can retreat
to their own private channels; but I myself favor electronic mail and
newsgroups, which I can read on my own terms without parrying
incessantly with dyspeptic strangers half a planet removed. I
promise, dear readers: I’ll inflict nary a chat transcript on you.
Certain omissions, however, really pain me. Given more time, I’d
have loved to cover the growth of the community network
movement. For free, in many cities, you can open up an Internet
account and tap into electronic libraries all over the world or receive
electronic mail. Best of all, “communets” can bring communities
together. The Net is one of the big lures to get people online, but
once there, they may be able to fetch the schedule of their local
public radio stations, find out about local charities, and talk back
electronically to officials of city halls.

What’s fascinating is the resemblance between these local nets
and the Net at large. People on both would rather chat with other
citizens than swap e-mail with the politicians or other celebrities.
And why not? Communets are communities, just as the Net, serving
so many interests, is a series of communities. Alas, Stoll does not
appreciate the possibilities here.
Stoll is an astronomer, not just a hacker, and his makes me feel as
if he is using a scratchy pair of binoculars to look for life on Mars.
Fixated on negatives, he has downplayed even the obvious: the Net
equivalent of Martian mountains. Has Stoll dropped by
alt. music. chapel-hill, or rec. arts. dance, or alt. christnet. christianlife,
or the Dallas Virtual Jewish Community Center Home Page, or the
American Ireland Fund, or the Voter Education Project? And how
about the thousands of other Web pages in which individual Netfolks
can share with the world their love of families and pets, or
gardening, or, or old Chevies, or whatever else they enjoy, at or
away from their computers? Item by item, those are tiny, almost
invisible slices of Netlife; but en masse, they rise up as mountains.
Yes, yes, sex areas thrive on the Internet. But it is that way
offline, too; do snack-food stores turn millions each year off Chaucer
or Playboy? Of course Chaucer himself could be randy at times, as
could Shakespeare and Joyce and hundreds of other literary greats—
an inconvenient fact for the American ayatollahs who hope to censor
the Net.
The biggest irony here is that the Internet can actually promote
Family Values and strengthen real neighborhoods. As George Gilder
and others have noted, the new technology can serve people’s exact
needs rather than just dish out the standard sex and violence so
beloved to TV networks. The Net is Example One in my opinion—
especially The Barcroft School and Civic League page on the World
Wide Web. Several thousand people live in the Barcroft area of
Arlington, Virginia, near Washington, D. C. It’s neither a slum nor a
glitzy, status-crazed neighborhood, just a good place to raise the
families that the ayatollahs love to extol. An old Methodist church
has served as a community house. Now an electronic equivalent is
on the Web, complete with a color photo of the church building;

people can catch up with neighborhood news and learn of ice cream
socials.
I’m writing this paragraph just before the Barcroft Fourth of July
parade. The word from the World Wide Web is that Susan O’Hara
Christopher will be the Grand Marshall. People can enjoy Nancy
Tankersley’s watercolors of past parades, or “Jim Lande’s famous
tree trunk sculpture. Games for the kids, no political campaigning,
hot dogs and lemonade, the new Barcroft tee shirts and lots more!”
The higher the percentage of Netfolks among the citizenry, the more
Fourth of July bulletins we’ll see in cyberspace.
Across the Potomac in D. C., the Internet is helping to reduce the
number of hookers and drug pushers plying the Blagden Alley
neighborhood. If the police catch you looking for women or dope, a
man named Paul Warren will put your name on the World Wide Web.
Thanks to his “Crimenet,” residents no longer stand as much a
chance of finding a hooker at work on the sidewalk a few yards from
toddlers in living rooms. Not everyone would approve of the privacy
implications here, but I myself love what Warren is doing. Like
thousands of small-town newspapers that print the names of the
arrested, Warren is just spreading around the public record. A notice
reminds readers that “Criminal defendants are presumed innocent
until proven guilty”; and he is willing to post an update for anyone
exonerated. Warren isn’t saying that prostitution should be illegal
everywhere, just that it should not force young families out of
Blagden Alley.
That, in fact, is how I feel about net. sex. If a fifth grader
encountered alt. sex. bestiality whenever he or she flicked on a
computer, why, yes, I’d join the ayatollahs. But the Net is not like the
pre-Web Blagden Alley or daytime television. You normally don’t find
sex on the Net—at least not the truly kinky type—unless you seek it
out. And the computer industry is working on software to reduce the
chances of children accidentally running across alt. sex. bestiality.
Even now, of course, the language in the average area of the Net is
much cleaner than the words in the locker room of the typical high
school. Trying to ban “smut” from the Internet would be like shutting

down high school football because some sixteen-year-old tackles
love to cuss at teammates and gawk at nude pictures.
Granted, the Net has problems, and rather serious ones. A
Californian stole 20,000 credit card numbers from Net users; in New
York some young men met through the Net and figured out ways to
order tens of thousands of dollars in merchandise illegally. Many
Netfolks think it’s too risky to send credit card numbers over the Net
itself when ordering merchandise; better to use the telephone or
fax. What’s more, just as Stoll says, business on the Net is
overhyped. Meanwhile the Feds have reduced subsidies to the Net.
Over in Australia there are already bothersome charges for use
according to the amount of material transmitted, and people fear
that the same could happen in the States.
Just as frustratingly, the technology isn’t quite there yet. Pictures
can take centuries to appear on my screen when I fetch material on
the World Wide Web. I hook into the Internet by dialing up ClarkNet,
a company in a barn south of Baltimore. This is one of the best
services, but a good part of the time, in recent months, I’ve suffered
a busy signal or worse when I try to dial in. Given the overcrowding
of the Net, electronic mail takes longer to arrive than it once did. I
believe Stoll when he says that in some cases the United States
Postal Service will get mail from one place to the other faster than
the Net will handle e-mail. That’s the exception, but I’m disturbed to
see it happen even part of the time.
I lament, too, the lack of commercial books available on the Net
for free, in the public library tradition. Cliff Stoll is absolutely right to
want better content, and my friend Jim Besser would agree with us.
Jim is a journalist avid for new facts; he regrets that so much of the
information on the Net is wrong or out of date. Beyond that, his
Internet connection sometimes goes south when he is under a
deadline.
Cures for the Internet’s problems, however, are or could be on the
way. Technology will make the Net safer to use and more reliable—lo
and behold, the computers in the barn have behaved somewhat
better these past few weeks. Over the long run, too, Netlife will
improve. Popular programs in some cases, even now, are letting

customers send credit card numbers online without the hackers
intercepting them. Net businesses will take off when more people
sign on and young hackers get jobs and families.
The Internet will even survive the reduction of subsidies from
Washington. The price of the technology will just keep going down if
past trends apply, and if the government doesn’t let phone
companies gouge people. Everything is faster and cheaper. Once the
experts doubted that ordinary phone lines could carry signals at 9.6
kilobits, or 9,600 bits, per second. Today, even if I’m not IBM or the
phone company, I can cruise along at around 28.8 kilobits per
second, which is enough to receive a book in a few minutes.
If Cliff Stoll really wants electronic books, then computer networks
can transmit them. When, just when, will Washington be brave
enough to work toward a well-stocked national digital library offering
commercial books for all; why should we replicate online the “savage
inequalities” of our libraries and schools?
Netfolks aren’t the reason why such a library for the Internet is so
far off right now, and why we may well end up with a national digital
bookstore as opposed to a true library offering books at no charge or
at minimal cost. Even technophobic librarians—they exist, even if not
in the same numbers as before—aren’t the true villains here.
Lobbyists are at fault. Bill Clinton’s intellectual property czar, Bruce
Lehman, is himself a former lawyer-lobbyist who acts as if he is still
fighting for his old copyright clients. Members of his former law firm
have donated tens of thousands of dollars to influential politicians.
And in a five-year period people with corporate or family ties to a
legal publisher, West Publishing in Minnesota, have given more than
$738,000 in political contributions, some of which went to members
of Congress influential on copyright matters.
With less eagerness to please lobbyists pushing for corporate
business plans—rather than for the commonweal—the U. S.
government could divert resources from bureaucracy to knowledge
and pay publishers and writers fairly. How? Suppose Washington
would link the national library with a focused program to buy
hardware that schools and local libraries could lend out. In effect the
Feds would prime the private market by encouraging mass

production and by sending a message about priorities. Small, tablet-
shaped computers with extra-sharp screens could eventually go on
sale—much sooner than otherwise—for $99.95 at Kmart. And these
same machines, although designed for reading electronic books,
would be excellent for the Net or for filling out easy electronic forms;
we could save tens of billions in money and time in the private and
public sectors of America’s $6-trillion economy. Needless to say, too,
this affordable hardware could mean more eyes for retail businesses
on the Internet.
Then high tech wouldn’t pose such a problem to nontechie
consumers and to computerphobic women and minorities. A study
out of the Georgia Institute of Technology showed that 94 percent of
the surveyed users on the Web were male and 87 percent were
white. With less-threatening hardware and proper training of the
right people, however, schools and neighborhood libraries could help
bring a much wider segment of society on the Net. Cliff Stoll is
aware of the possibilities here. He knew two years ago of my
TeleRead proposal to improve the content of the Net, get many more
people online, and spread the electronic books around from the very
start. How much easier it must be for him to eulogize old wooden
card catalogues and avoid a nasty tangle with lobbyist-cowed
politicians and bureaucrats.
Touring NetWorld! Yourself—
Via the Web
Webfolk, check out the Internet Underground
Music Archive, White Rabbit Toys, electronic
magazines, and many of the other Net
delights I’ve described in this book. Just use
your Netscape, Mosaic, or other browser to
go to

http:// www. webcom. com/~ prima/networld. ht
ml
You’ll find there a list of various Web sites
mentioned here in the pulped wood
NetWorld! —and perhaps some informal
updates. You can reach the sites immediately.
Just click on the hypertext links. People at the
other end may change the links, but I’ve
made them as up-to-date as I could.
If you would like Net addresses of some of
the people mentioned in this book, go to
http:// www. clark. net/rothman/pub/networld. h
tml
Perhaps you’ll also want to see a detailed
electronic version of my TeleRead proposal for
a well-stocked, cost-justified national digital
library. It could let ordinary readers dial up
the entire texts of copyrighted books from
home for free without cheating publishers and
writers. For more on TeleRead, check out the
hyperlinked Net incarnation of my chapter in
a forthcoming book Scholarly Publishing: The
Electronic Frontier ( Cambridge,
Massachusetts, M. I. T. Press, 1995 ):
http:// www. clark. net/rothman/pub/telhome. h
tml
Bashing technology, of course, is hardly new. In 1854 a writer
complained: “We are in great haste to construct a magnetic
telegraph from Maine to Texas; but Maine and Texas, it may be,
have nothing important to communicate. ” He said that “We are

eager to tunnel under the Atlantic and bring the Old World some
weeks nearer to the New; but perchance the first news that will leak
through to the broad, flapping American ear will be that Princess
Adelaide has the whooping cough.”[1.8] Henry David Thoreau was the
writer and the words appeared in Walden.
Does their source, however, make them less dubious? Hardly.
Imagine America without the telegraph—without an opportunity to
forge lucrative commercial ties with the Old World, or to strengthen
Texas’s ties to Washington. As it turned out, Texas and the rest of
the country had plenty to say. So did railroad employees talking to
each other; companies could more easily use single tracks to handle
traffic in both directions, knowing that the telegraph was there to
handle scheduling.[1.9] In other fields, such as medicine, the
telegraph undoubtedly hastened progress as well. It also helped
friends and families keep in touch as the country was settled; today
the Net does the same with people in this era of international travel.
Technology, then, while ripe with opportunities for abuse, can do far
more than recruit “Girls of the Net” or spread word of a princess’s
whooping cough.
Ironically, if the Cliff Stolls prevail, and if too many white hats
abandon the nets as “devoid of warmth and human kindness,” then
his predictions will come to pass; the greedy will take over, confident
that others won’t mind so much.
Together with millions of other Netfolks, I’ll remember the Great
Spamming of ’94. Laurence A. Canter and Martha S. Siegel,
husband-and-wife partners in an Arizona law firm called Canter and
Siegel, wanted to sell their services as immigration experts. So they
splattered a “Green Card” ad—as if hurling spam against a wall—
across some 6,000 newsgroups on Usenet. They didn’t care if you
preferred to read about baseball or UNIX; they wanted your
eyeballs. The Net seethed. I myself disliked many of the tactics used
against Canter and Siegel—was it really necessary to threaten death
or favor them with a slew of unsought magazine subscriptions?—but
clearly they merited some good, strong, healthy loathing. I
complained to the American Bar Association, which, at the time, was
spending hundreds of thousands of dollars on a PR campaign to

upgrade the image of lawyers. You might say that C&S set the
goodwill account back by several million.
My big regret is that I lacked more time to raise hell against
Canter and his wife online and in other ways. The glory of the Net,
this series of communities, was and is diversity; here C&S were
dumbing it down to the broadcast model where one program served
all. But Canter and Siegel didn’t give a whit about the Net as it
existed, about the outrage that so many unwilling people were
bearing the costs of sending and storing their unwanted messages,
about the fact that Usenet couldn’t survive continued assaults in this
vein, about the damage they were doing to the various forms of Net
culture, a phrase that C&S would undoubtedly have dismissed as
an oxymoron.
Canter and Siegel later added to the insult with How to Make a
Fortune on the Information Superhighway, the 1990s equivalent of a
guide to exterminating buffalo.[1.10] The book talked of selling to 30
million people, which was malarkey. Some Net demographers
challenged the figure at the time—reality may finally have caught up
—but more important, most of those 30 million could only send and
receive electronic mail as opposed to using services such as the
World Wide Web. And just how many people wanted to receive junk
mail from marketers? Of course C&S might suggest mailing lists for
the receptive—nothing wrong there—but without access to the right
Net services, fewer people would know of the lists in the first place.
Does this mean that the Internet should be free of commerce?
Quite the opposite. The challenge is simply to avoid letting the
hardsellers overwhelm the Internet. Countless areas of the Net exist
where people not only tolerate ads, they want to read them.
Besides, the commercial and noncommercial can build on each other.
When I put my TeleRead proposal on the World Wide Web—that is,
my call for a well-stocked national digital library with copyrighted
books included—I built in hypertext links[1.11] to Web sites that could
be useful. And several just happened to be commercial. The
Minneapolis Star Tribune, for example, had done a Pulitzer-quality
expose of the thousands of dollars that West Publishing had doled
out in trips for some Supreme Court justices who passed judgment

on copyright matters. Just why should I have avoided this superb
material when a commercial publication was good enough to share it
with the Net for free?
Electronic cafes, found in San Francisco, Seattle, London, and
Hong Kong, among other locations, are another good example of
how the commercial and noncommercial can strengthen each other.
Cafes with Internet hookups can even help bridge the gap between
Net and life. The Internet Cafe at 1363 4th Avenue in Prince George,
British Columbia, doesn’t just offer a coffee bar. Customers of the
local Internet provider can pick up their e-mail there and wander
around the Net, read “a good, old-fashioned cork bulletin board for
community information exchanges,” learn about local service
agencies, watch resident artists at work, buy crafts from all over the
world, and even get advice from a local psychologist, Russ
Winterbotham, who just happens to own the place.
When Stoll writes about an Ontario bookstore with a water garden
and three cats, it’s easy to appreciate the potential charms of
commerce offline. But clearly the Net itself can spice up a traditional
business. In London, you can drop by the Cyberia cafe at 39
Whitfield Street and plunk down £1.50 for a large cappuccino and
£2.50 for a half-hour on the Net. The word is that the cafe has
drawn “more media coverage than a small war.” I’m not surprised.
Even if prices might be a bit lower by my standards, Cyberia is
meeting a definite need. Of course Stoll would complain that the
customers in the electronic cafes are “surrounded by people, yet
escaping into conversations with distant strangers.” Isn’t he
forgetting something, however: The way many Net aficionados love
to meet the like-minded in person?
I’m also keen, needless to say, on the pioneering work that
thousands of small businesses are doing on the World Wide Web
itself—rather than posting in-your-face ads to nonrelevant
newsgroups.
No, Web businesses aren’t charities or consumer service
organizations. But by offering details about their products and
services, they are respecting our intelligence far more than does the
huckstery on television. You wouldn’t want to buy a new Buick or

Volvo if you simply went by statistics and photos on the Web. But
you just might learn more about gas mileage and safety claims than
if you relied simply on the sales rep and brochures in the showroom.
The more you shop this way, the more you’ll encourage
manufacturers to improve their products and services rather than
just to shell out megabucks on more Super Bowl ads. Net business,
major limitations notwithstanding, is indeed A Good Thing.
Our first stop in NetWorld!, in fact, might well be one of my
favorite stores in cyberspace—White Rabbit Toys.

CHAPTER
TWO
Business on the Net:
From White Rabbit
Toys to “Intel Inside”
Bob Lilienfeld worked for Procter&Gamble and the outfit behind the
Muppets, and JoAnn Lilienfeld was a buyer at Bloomingdale’s.
Nowadays he consults on solid waste and other environmental
issues. His wife, a neatly coifed woman who looks and dresses like
[ 2. 1 ] an upscale schoolteacher, has started a toy store called White
Rabbit Toys in honor of the character in Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland. Bob enjoys technology. JoAnn herself is no slouch in
that area. They are in their forties now but relish new marketing
wrinkles just as much as when they were earning their MBAs from
Northwestern University.
So Bob and JoAnn Lilienfeld have set up shop on the Internet,
where, in a surprising but logical way that a mathematician like
Lewis Carroll would have loved, their respective business ventures
mesh.
Wandering through commercial listings on the Web, I discovered
the virtual White Rabbit just as Christmas shoppers were crowding
the corporeal White Rabbit up in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Bob was a
technohusband par excellence. He designed the toy store online,
claimed just the right address on the World Wide Web
( http:// www. toystore. com ), wrestled with the technical issues, and
helped take orders from customers, the first of whom lived in Brazil.

JoAnn would pay Bob in his favorite currency: teddy bears. The big
question was: Will they make any money at it? I electronically hung
around their virtual store and chatted with Bob on the phone as the
season progressed.
He and his wife were among the thousands of small business
people who were trying new marketing paradigms on the Net, where
the denizens hated intrusive huckstery but might take to electronic
catalogues.
Compared to most other business people on the Internet, the
Lilienfelds were quick studies. You could type an electronic address
into your computer and see a White Rabbit logo and a greeting from
the toy store in several languages. Then you clicked your mouse on
the proper area of your screen and opened up a colorful catalogue
with not only blurbs but also pictures of tops and puzzles and
wooden toy trains of the kind your parents might have bought for
you. Most of White Rabbit’s offerings were classics that you would
ᴙ never see at Toys Us.
Bob and JoAnn Lilienfeld wanted their business to stand out. Soon
their electronic forms might let you type in the age of your child,
information about his or her interests, your budget, and other
constraints. You would instantly receive tips on what gifts to buy.
Even now, you could order online without talking to a human—not
as heartless as it might sound, if you simply valued your time and
telephone money. The electronic forms could even calculate the
postage.
White Rabbit intrigued me, and others felt the same way. Within a
few weeks of my first visit, they got calls from the Wall Street
Journal and the Detroit Free Press. Some reporters had caught on to
the obvious: While Hollywood and Washington were off prattling
clichés about the overpriced medium called interactive TV—while Al
Gore was cracking jokes on stage with Lily Tomlin during an
entertainment summit disguised as an “information” one—
entrepreneurs and Fortune 500 companies were trying ads on the
Net. The Internet often narrows differences between large and small
businesses. Even little ones can reach global audiences and, through

well-planned Web areas, look like giants to customers in Rio or
Tokyo. New cybermalls sprout up to get technophobic companies
online by providing both technical and creative services.
Corporations fight over addresses for the Net. Stanley Kaplan, a
service that tutors students for academic examinations such as the
Scholastic Aptitude Test, sued a competitor that stole the name
kaplan. com. A writer for Wired magazine mischievously claimed
McDonald’s name, which the hamburger chain hadn’t yet registered.
Such oversights, however, were rapidly becoming the exception in an
era when prime Web sites made the pages of Newsweek.
Even electronic hookers ( “We go all the way” ) were on the
Internet—in fact, operating under the name “Brandy’s Babes. ” They
plied their trade from Arizona, the same wild and quirky state from
which Canter and Siegel enraged the Net. And yet, if you cast the
usual moral questions aside, the Babes seemed to be exemplary
citizens of cyberspace. Not just hypesters, they posted specifics like
prices, bust, hip, and waist measurements, and preferences in men.
“No beards, ” a Babe warned customers. “Employed men only. ”
Unlike the hardsellers, the Babes did not inflict unwanted ads on
thousands of newsgroups. And in line with the two-way traditions of
the Net, they solicited messages from customers—dirty ones that the
Babes might charge good money to answer. You could even dial up
Brandy’s and see a live Babe at her computer with her impressive
bosom exposed. The gig lasted several zany months. Fear of police
raids grew, however, even before the ayatollahs in the U. S. Senate
ranted against net. sex. I finally saw just a blank screen except for a
laconic message alluding to “bad links. ”
Separately a condom store was online as well. It offered medical
information, supplied tantalizing odds and ends on such topics as
“The Size of a Man’s Pony, ” and wittily answered questions from
appreciative readers. Like Brandy’s, it operated in a nonintrusive
way.
The World Wide Web was also a virtual home for thousands of
more conventional businesses such as the manufacturer of a toy gun
that shot Ping-Pong balls, a city’s worth of bookstores, Godiva
chocolate, and Ragu spaghetti. None other than the Home Shopping

Network bought out a Net retailer specializing in computer
equipment. Pizza Hut went online. And the United States was hardly
alone in this trend. The Singaporeans were competing in the
cyberpizza race—Shakey’s Pizza was girding to take orders, via a fax-
Net link, from hungry scientists and students at the National
University of Singapore. A large Irish bank advertised on the Net. So
did the Royal Bank of Canada. It mounted a bilingual Web area for
both English- and French-speaking customers who, once past the
first menu, didn’t have to clutter their screens with material in the
wrong language.
Some of the old technical barriers, of course, remained even in
rich countries: most hardware was still rotten for doing home
shopping. What the customers needed, and what Silicon Valley could
not yet provide, happened to be small, affordable, sharp-screened
computers that could colorfully show off the merchandise. The main
way to look at the Net was through Mosaic-style programs. And even
at 28.8 kilobits per second—the highest speed possible through
widely available modems—it took too long to go from page to page
of electronic catalogues. The biggest problem was the software
installation, which could be tricky. Although software such as
Internet in a Box simplified the matters, the Net was not yet TV-easy
to use.
Even so, some companies were designing inexpensive gadgets,
which could sell for mere hundreds of dollars, that would allow
people to surf the Internet on their televisions. I hated the idea of
anyone reading text off a blurry television screen. But at least the
powers of the computer world were finally thinking of the Internet
as a real, live marketplace. Just as important, Prodigy, America
Online, CompuServe, and rivals were preparing to let customers
reach Web sites from their proprietary networks.
Microsoft was planning point-and-click Internet capabilities for its
Windows 95 operating system. And it had bought stock in a key
Internet provider and would be linking its own network tightly with
the Net. Advertising Age estimated the number of people able to
access the Web itself—the best place for Net advertising—at several
million at the start of 1995.[2.2] And that number might push past 11

million by 1998, according to a report from a Massachusetts research
firm.[2.3] So, even if Internet merchants aren’t advertising in the most
consumer-oriented of places right now, they might well be awash in
new business later on.
The existing denizens of the Internet were more technical than the
people on, say, Prodigy or America Online. Some software
companies used this to their great advantage. A good example was
Cyberspace Development Company, which had created an
extraordinarily useful program called The Internet Adapter, or TIA.
Most Net people couldn’t enjoy Mosaic-style viewers because their
network connections did not allow this. But TIA let even Netfolks
with $18-a-month accounts use Mosaic and other marvels. And to
buy TIA, they did not have to go to a retail store.
If technically savvy, they could pick it up on the Internet itself. A
digital key, transmitted via e-mail, allowed only authorized customers
to use the publicly available files. Skeptics could try a test version of
TIA for a few weeks before paying for it by check or credit card.
Because of the low cost of distribution and, in my case, the lack of
need for full consulting services, I spent just $25 on a product that
might have cost a good $50-$75 if sold at the usual store. And by
normally using a basic hookup with my Web software—as opposed
to a deluxe, time-sensitive one—I could save hundreds of dollars a
year.
The benefits of the Internet, for the Cyberspace Development
Company and me, didn’t stop there. Via discussion groups, TIA
sellers kept us customers up to date, and just as important, we
could share tips among ourselves. We could also use the World Wide
Web to catch up with long documents; in fact, updated versions of
TIA could travel to us over the Net. All of this, including the
elimination of the need to go to the store, was taking place on
commercial networks such as CompuServe. But the costs would
have been greater for Cyberspace and customers alike if the
company had to pay the usual commercial rates for electronic mail.
Among the wares talked up online were upbeat prognostications
about the Net itself. For $3,500 you could buy a report from a
California consulting firm that said annual commerce on the Net and

commercials services such as CompuServe would reach $ 600 billion
by the turn of the century. I was skeptical. Merchants like JoAnn
Lilienfeld would have to sell warehouse after warehouse of stuffed
animals or toys or whatever the offerings were. In fact, $ 600 billion
was a good 8 percent of international commerce. On reflection,
however, the estimate from Killen&Associates seemed possible.
Through the Net you might find a buyer for shipload of scrap iron or
an office building, not just a stray teddy bear in need of a child. I
phoned Mary Cronin of Boston College, who had written a well -
regarded book called Doing Business on the Internet. It teemed with
examples from Digital Equipment Corporation and IBM and many
other computer-oriented firms. And she had researched it before
most business people grasped the importance of the Internet. Yes,
she said, the $ 600 billion figure sounded credible if you counted
business-to-business transactions.
Daniel Dern, an Internet consultant, had his own opinion on the
statistics. He said the Net was like the highway. Just what did you
count—all the goods that went over the road? The combined salaries
of the people on the way to work? I could see his point.
Whatever the exact numbers, the demographics and technology
might be on the side of the many retail businesses if they stuck it
out on the Net and kept expectations realistic. Scads of people in
Generation Net were about to marry. They would buy houses and
cars and whatever else mattered beyond stereos and Internet -
optimized computers. Just in the late summer and fall of 1994, the
number of Net-related businesses on the Web had doubled, and a
good many of the newcomers were not technical. Could the Net
really, then, enrich business people without technical backgrounds?
Was there indeed money in what had once been the province of
cash-strapped college students and dreamy researchers?
Plenty of people thought that the answer lay in the case history of
Grant’s Flowers, which, like White Rabbit Toys, operated out of Ann
Arbor, Michigan. Larry Grant had been a cover boy in an enticing
article on the front page of the business section of the New York
Times; the Internet pulsed with chatter about the electronic coups
that he supposedly had achieved for just $ 28 a month. Excited

Netfolks reported that he did not even have to type to his customers
on the Internet; new orders just poured in on a fax machine with a
Net connection. The California gold rush was almost a century and a
half old. And yet, watching the Grant legend take off, I might as well
have been among the boots and beards at Sutter’s Mill.
So I talked not only to the Lilienfelds but to Larry Grant, the
legendary florist himself. Many in the media were still enchanted
with the Electronic Frontier metaphor, and I remembered the old
films about Davy Crockett, the Tennessee frontiersman who loved
corny jokes, bear-wrestling tales, coonskin hats, and Crockett-
friendly news accounts—the grist for Walt Disney later on. What was
next, a movie epic with a musical tribute to “Larry Grant, king of the
Net frontier”?
A market might indeed be ballooning for cyber-retailers, as the
hypesters said. But I still wondered about the present. What counted
was not all the puffery about 30 million Netfolks, many of whom can
only read electronic mail as opposed to seeing roses or toy tops or
other merchandise. No, the real determinant was how often people
dial up your particular site and bought. One well-crafted Web area,
which advertised technically related goods, enjoyed just a handful of
visits in six months without a single sale. This was an issue aside
from the total amount of business done on the Net. Having talked
with Mary Cronin and others, I hadn’t any doubt about those giant
commodity transactions and all the use of the Net by Big Business to
automate the paperwork of commerce. But what about the small
fry? Was the excitement about Grant truly justified? I’ll answer those
questions in the pages ahead, where I’ll return to the Lilienfelds and
to Grant, and where I’ll examine the following:
 MCI, the phone company. It has provided thousands of miles of
Net connections and now rents out electronic storefronts on the
Net. MCI offers one of the slickest Web areas—complete with a
fictitious publishing house (now evolving into a real one) that
accepts manuscripts from real readers. Advertising Age has hailed
the MCI site as “unquestionably the best Internet marketing effort
to date.” Frustratingly, however, while preparing to dispense advice

on cyberspace, MCI in early 1995 was committing some of the
very mistakes it should be telling its customers to avoid.
 Federal Express, whose Internet presence shows the potential of
the Net for business-to-business transactions, not just the
consumer variety. Ironically the people at FedEx in some ways
were demonstrating more Net savvy than MCI was at the time,
even though the Internet was more in the territory of the latter.
The old values of customer service still reigned above all else. A
smaller competitor of Federal Express, a shipper called Right-O -
Way, was also making outstanding use of the Net. In some ways it
was even staying ahead of the big boys.
 Intel, the chipmaker, which learned the hard way how good the
Internet was for spreading news of flaws in products. The Net
abounds with skeptical academics and consumerists with fast
typing fingers.
 Other hazards of the Internet for business people. What if you set
up an electronic storefront like the Lilienfelds’ and then a
manufacturer decided to cut out the middle people and sell on the
Net directly or through a larger outlet? Security is another threat.
While I was writing NetWorld!, most commercial areas on the Net
lacked a way to protect credit card numbers. Hackers broke into
General Electric’s Web area and stole corporate secrets. Another
risk is competitors looking over price lists and assessing the
strengths and weaknesses of products.
Those caveats will end the chapter. By far, the Internet is a
positive rather than a negative factor for business and customers
alike. Wired consumers will reward good companies, punish the
losers, and spur the winners to do still better.
Bob and JoAnn
Lilienfeld:
The Net as a

Way to Promote
Small
Businesses
Thousands of miles to the south of Ann Arbor, home of White
Rabbit Toys, Luciana Gores was reading a popular mailing list called
Net Happenings. It was a kind of town crier. Each day from North
Dakota a man named Gleason Sackman sent out informative posts
on the many new services that were springing up on the Internet.
Gores worked as a network expert, and she was already used to
buying technical books through the Internet, which offered a far
greater variety than what she would find in her own city, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
She was also the mother of a seven-year-old named Lucas. So
when the mailing list told her of White Rabbit, she checked it out on
the Web.
People who visited the virtual store, or at least those with the right
equipment, saw a logo with the rabbit from Lewis Caroll’s
imagination. They also conjured up a color picture of a real toy store
with shelf after shelf of tot pleasers, a tiny table and stool on the
floor, and a look of friendly chaos—in short, a shopper’s delight for
children and parents alike, which in fact the “real” White Rabbit was.
The traditional store, the one at 2611 Plymouth Road, had thrived.
Now Bob and JoAnn Lilienfeld were trying to woo virtual customers
such as Luciana Gores. Their electronic White Rabbit just may have
been the first full-service toy store—as opposed to one-product
billboards or specialty shops—to open up on the Internet.
An ad on the opening screen helped set the tone for Luciana
Gores and other customers of White Rabbit: “We specialize in high-
quality toys that help children to create, learn, imagine, and explore.
Our toys come from all over the world. We offer such international
favorites as Brio (Sweden), Ravensburger (Germany), Primetime
Playthings and Creativity for Kids (United States).”

Suitably equipped customers could actually see pictures of the
toys, including a Ravensburger game called the A-maze-ing
Labyrinth. “Travel the corridors of the enchanted labyrinth in search
of treasures,” read the carnival-like pitch. “But watch out! The walls
shift, and the passages can close, leaving you trapped! For ages
eight and older.” Lucas was a year younger, but did it matter if the
child was as bright as his mother, the network expert? “It seems to
be an interesting game,” Luciana Gores e-mailed me, “and it won a
Parent’s Choice award.” And so she paid her $24.95 and shipping,
which, given the light weight of the toy, was modest.
Thanks to the Internet, the Lilienfelds suddenly had the whole
world as a market, not just customers living near by. The fact that
White Rabbit was in a university town, with graduates all over the
planet, could only help. So could the fact that the Internet was
expanding overseas even more rapidly than in the United States.
White Rabbit also appealed to Stuart Lowry, another promising
kind of customer—the computer jock turned family man. A Maryland
resident in his late twenties, he wouldn’t have made the pulses of
marketers quicken several years ago; he was a grad student then at
Johns Hopkins University and, like many people on the Internet, had
more time than money. But that had changed. Lowry now worked at
Computer Science Corporation, a large defense contractor, pulling
down a salary in the mid-forties. He was married and lived in a
townhouse, and four months ago his wife had given birth to a baby
boy. And so, when Lowry was cruising the Internet from work and
spotted a notice announcing White Rabbit Toys, he favored it with a
virtual visit. He ordered a colorful toy top for $13, the Floor Spinner
from Primetime Playthings.
Many people on the Web were young males more interested in
pizza or condoms than in baby toys, but the Lilienfelds were looking
ahead a few years when the same Net people would be parents. “It’s
an act of faith,” Bob Lilienfeld said. “Today’s demographics and
selling a lot of toys on the Net may be out of synch. But today’s
college students are tomorrow’s parents. Tomorrow’s parents aren’t
going to consider ordering by computer any different from getting in
a car and going to the shopping center.”

Other trends might work in the Lilienfelds’ favor. More and more
Americans were time-short, with long commutes; Stuart Lowry
himself spent forty-five minutes each way, and that actually was a
quick trip compared to those in cities such as Los Angeles. In
northern Virginia I knew of parents rising at 4 A. M. to go to jobs in
Washington some forty miles away, and not a few of them were
high-tech workers who would sooner or later end up on the Internet.
When I reached Bob and Jo Ann Lilienfeld in the middle of
November, White Rabbit itself had been on the Net maybe a week
and had enjoyed around 1,000 virtual visits in that time. They were
hoping that these numbers would multiply as Christmas neared. It
was too soon to tell how many of these people would actually order.
Back in June, though, the Lilienfelds had grown excited after reading
about Larry Grant in the New York Times and elsewhere.
“I saw this figure of 20 million Net users,” Jo Ann said of the
numbers du jour, “and thought there’s definitely an opportunity here.
But I didn’t want to go about it in a half-baked manner. I thought
there had to be someone who could combine knowledge of the Net
with marketing experience.” She checked out a local cybermall and
found it wanting in the latter area.
That wasn’t surprising, given Jo Ann’s perfectionism and
eagerness to avoid easy but far-from-satisfactory solutions—whether
in retail or life in general. She had grown up in a cash-short
household where, more often than not, the children would get out
the oatmeal cartons and construction paper and scissors and cobble
together their own toys. And the same creativity had carried over to
her Bloomies days as one of the resident experts on Christmas tree
trimmings. According to the Lilienfelds, it was JoAnn who came up
with the idea of selling leafless, white branches. She and Bob had
moved to Ann Arbor because he kept flying off to the Midwest to
consult for clients in Midland, and they felt that married people
needed to spend more time together. JoAnn went about establishing
the White Rabbit just as conscientiously.
Not finding the right toys for her own children, she studied the
demographics of Ann Arbor to verify that a toy store could thrive
there. She concluded that in a university community, many would

love those wooden train sets and other classic toys as opposed to
the trendier offerings that were touted on television and sold at Toys
ᴙ
Us. Ann Arbor responded well. A local paper told how she blessed
her store with a public bathroom—how she kept diapers and spare
wipes around for the parents of children and emergencies. No need
for toilets existed on the Internet. But even at this early stage,
having read up on the Netfolks, she was attuned to the need to
adapt to the culture of cyberspace.
JoAnn finally decided that her best savior, the requisite miracle-
worker with both Net and marketing experience, lived right there in
the Lilienfeld household. Those past few months her husband had
been succeeding off a mix of garbage and the Internet.
To be exact, Bob Lilienfeld was advising clients about future
garbage, the packing materials for consumer products, a major
contributor to landfills. He hadn’t anything against recycling. But
thanks to his work at Procter&Gamble, he had concluded that the
best way to cope with waste was to design packages to avoid it in
the first place. Manufacturers and customers alike would win. Bob
would go on to help put together a network of likeminded
consultants, including William Rathje, a world-famous garbage
expert at the University of Arizona who had co-authored Rubbish!
The Archaeology of Garbage. Lilienfeld met Rathje at a press
conference but also found himself relying on another source of
contacts, the Internet. Again and again he had heard about the Net
from professors at the University of Michigan, and he soon was in
touch with other garbage mavens around the planet.
“I started sucking in information,” he recalled. “I found out about
mailing lists and newsgroups, and then I decided I would put my
newsletter up on the Net and see what happened.” The newsletter
was a way to let clients know about his consulting company, the
Cygnus Group. It helped Fortune 500 companies, other businesses,
trade associations, educational groups, and others grow more
sensitive to environmental concerns in activities ranging from
packaging to marketing.

Just as JoAnn was careful to befriend Ann Arbor in the right way,
Bob tried to honor the conventions of the Net—avoiding hucksterism
in favor of helpful information. The announcements about the
newsletter were low-key, and response was good. Soon he was
sharing his articles with hundreds of Netfolks who asked such
questions as: “I recently saw an article on compact fluorescent light
bulbs in Consumer Reports. Why aren’t more stores and utilities
selling them? ”
An “Ask Bill and Bob” column, cowritten with William Rathje,
revealed that such lights “take at least eight times more energy to
produce than old-fashioned bulbs. And they’re heavier, so they use
more energy during shipping. ” The column also told of an
experiment that McDonald’s was conducting in Albany, New York,
with food and paper composting, saving perhaps 500-700 pounds
per week of solid waste. Readers could learn, too, that a nut seller
was moving from glass and plastic bottles to vacuum bags.
Bob Lilienfeld was hardly an eco-activist by the standards of, say,
Greenpeace; Dow Chemical was among his prime clients, after all.
But he was serving up information for people with many different
viewpoints, and by way of the proper clicks with your mouse, you
could travel from his Web site to areas of the Internet such as the
Envirolink Network, or EcoGopher, or EcoNet.
His newsletter, known as The ULS Report ( short for “use less
stuff” ), carried an item about CD-ROM disks. It described them as
“an environmentally friendly way to reduce waste and save
resources. One CD-ROM, including packaging, weighs under half a
pound. The 22 books that it replaces weigh 70 pounds. ” Knowingly
or not, he was helping to pave the way for the virtual White Rabbit—
where the same principles applied. Via the Internet, White Rabbit
could advertise to thousands without printing up catalogues for
them. Oh, they might request catalogues later, but then they would
have prequalified themselves, reducing the solid waste. Lewis Carroll
would have approved of the reasoning here. What’s more, unlike
paper catalogues, Lilienfeld could update his electronic catalogue to
change prices or play up the fastest-selling merchandise.

The World Wide Web was the main way to put White Rabbit on
the Internet. Once merchants on the Net would have favored a
service called Gopher (as in “go-fer-it”) in honor of the mascot at the
University of Minnesota. Gopher displayed text very well and needed
less bandwidth on the Net than the Web did. But it lacked the
pizzazz of the Web-Mosaic combination; that is, the ability to conjure
up pictures and even sound so easily. Although Bob used Gopher for
digging up scholarly works about the environment, it was like black-
and-white television while Web-Mosaic was color and all the more
alluring for commercial purposes.
Getting White Rabbit on the Web was surprisingly cheap in some
ways. The Lilienfelds’ network provider charged JoAnn just $50 a
month, plus $2 an hour for when she was using electronic mail or
handling other chores. That didn’t include Bob’s time, however. He
knew at least the basics of the necessary programming language
and didn’t require the services of a consultant to the extent that
others might have.
Net. business, 3D-Style
You can’t touch merchandise on the World
Wide Web. But the next best thing may be in
store.
Virtual reality will let you “walk” through
Web businesses and see merchandise in
greater detail as you get “closer” to the object
on your screen. You can vary the angles, too.
So you could use your mouse to tour a
parking lot of automobiles. You could spot the
Volvo or the Saturn of your dreams, and
admire not only the outside but also the
interior.
No, the Web will never replace actual
shopping in most cases, but virtual reality will

be increasingly good at helping you screen
preliminary choices.
Keep an eye out, then, for WebSpace—the
new 3D viewer from Silicon Graphics, the
California company whose technology helped
create many of the special effects in Jurassic
Park. WebSpace will work as an add-on with
popular Web browsers such as Netscape and
Spyglass Enhanced Mosaic.
WebSpace-style technology, needless to
say, is far too good to waste on shopping
alone. Virtual reality software for the Web
may also help you tour the National Gallery of
Art, the Library of Congress, or Mount
Kilimanjaro—not to mention Hong Kong or Rio
de Janeiro.
3D technology could revolutionize the
financial world. Small investors, not just high -
powered stock analysts, could “see” stock
market trends. Your screen might display a
“Bulls’ Corner” with a collection of corporate
logos color-coded according to the
improvement in the stock price. You could
open up the logos and go on a tour of various
divisions, wandering around them
electronically with far more ease than you
could with less advanced software.
Similarly, at the suggestion of your broker,
you could tour a Bear’s Corner and see why
you might avoid or sell off certain shares.
Mind you, there are negatives. Corporations
—whether stores selling merchandise or
companies seeking investors—may use this
slick technology to fool the public. On the
other hand, the Internet is already a godsend
for consumers and small investors. Via Usenet

newsgroups and mailing lists, they can swap
information, taking care of course to look for
plants from companies trying to sway
grassroots impressions.
Lilienfeld himself put in most of the set-up hours. It took him a
few days of programming to design the Web site and scan in the
pictures of more than two dozen items—the train sets, the puzzles,
the tops, the blocks—and like an old-fashioned art director he had to
create within the limits of the medium. The big problem was photos.
If they were too big to move over the Net quickly, then the peeved
readers might give up and go on to another Web site. If too small,
however, the pictures would lack enough detail to show off the store
or the merchandise. In many cases Bob would let readers click on
pictures of bears to see larger versions of the photos.
He also had to worry about the software the readers used on the
Internet—certain Mosaic-style browsers would show smaller objects
first. Other challenges arose. What if technical standards changed so
that only certain browsers would work with Bob’s site? The real
White Rabbit might be a victim of acts of God such as the ebb and
flow of automobile traffic, and the virtual Rabbit needed to worry
about patterns of Net traffic, but it also could be subject to Jehovah
in the form of macho software firms who wanted everyone on the
Net to use their brainchildren.
Companies such as Netscape Communications Corporation actually
gave away Mosaic-style products to us Netfolk for free, hoping to
make fortunes instead off the software that merchants and others
denizens on the Web would run. Netscape was the champ in late
1994, the one that let you go from page to page faster than any
competitor did. Many people feared Netscape would be to the Web
what Microsoft was to software; suppose Netscape used technical
prowess and marketing skill to trample competitors, and maybe
overcharge the customers.

A green monster named Mozilla came up on one of Netscape’s
welcoming screens, and pessimists wondered if the company itself
might someday play the part. Marc Andreessen, the top software
designer at Netscape, had led the team that came up with the
original Mosaic at the University of Illinois. And then he had left
Illinois to join a new company that, from the ground up, had
designed the speedier Netscape product. The Web community
mightily hoped that Mozilla and keepers would behave themselves.
Suppose that Netscape joined Microsoft or credit card companies to
build in special, billing-related features that users of other browsers
couldn’t use?
Netscape, however, seemed benign so far, and the browser’s
technical wizardry was winning many friends. With a click of the
mouse, for example, you could scoot smoothly from the Web to the
usual newsgroups, and Bob Lilienfeld took advantage of this. He set
up his computer system so that customers with the proper software
could whiz directly from White Rabbit to child-related newsgroups.
One moment you could be shopping for toys; the next,
exchanging tips with a New Zealander or Norwegian on how to cope
with tantrum-prone babies. You could zip to misc. kids (“A great place
to swap parenting war stories”), misc. kids. consumers (“Help with
purchasing decisions”), or misc. kids. computer (“Enough said!”). Or
you or your children could read odds and ends about wombats,
Forester kangaroos, Tasmanian devils, fish, lions, dinosaurs, and
other creatures at WombatNet; print out drawings of the human
heart or the stars or hear a thunderbolt by way of the Franklin
Institute Virtual Science Museum; and learn the population of
Uganda or Afghanistan via The CIA World Factbook, a guide
assembled by the real-life Central Intelligence Agency.
Fighting the companies such as AT&T and the big cable interests,
many activists likened the Internet to a series of communities with
opportunities for small merchants and citizen-to-citizen
communications as opposed to couch potato offerings from the
Fortune 500. Merchants such as the Lilienfelds were acting out the
very models about which the activists waxed so enthusiastically.

Bob Lilienfeld understood that just as storekeepers in a small town
would do well to join the Kiwanis Club, virtual storefronts should be
part of Net life. JoAnn would soon go to a toy convention, and at
some point, she might well share her impressions with the denizens
of misc. kids and similar newsgroups, as opposed simply to touting
her products. At the same time, yes, by way of a signature at the
bottom of her posts, people on the Net could find out about the toy
store. She might even start a mailing list for the receptive. Bob had
already shown the success of this model by way of the list and other
tools used to promote his consulting activities.
A toy-oriented list could be much more than ads. “Going shopping
isn’t just spending money, ” Lilienfeld observed, “it’s a social
phenomenon. It’s seeing people you know, it’s being part of a
crowd. ” And it’s also picking up gossip and maybe even solid
information. “Ultimately the toy store will be bigger than just a toy
store, ” he said. “We might be providing information on child
development, of the appropriateness of certain toys or coloring
books. If you’re a model train hobbyist, we might be able to help
you hook up with model train users groups. ”
In fact, by way of the mouse-activated links from White Rabbit to
newsgroups and other Web sites, he was already offering much
more than just a store. The line between merchants and information
providers was blurring in the case of Bob and JoAnn; the higher the
quality of the information at White Rabbit, the more it would be a
virtual gathering place for people on the World Wide Web. I wasn’t
surprised to hear some people say that librarians might be the star
sales reps of the future. It wasn’t hype. Information, not just prices
and selection of merchandise, would be what drew Netfolks to sites
such as the Lilienfeldss’. Of course Bob Lilienfeld might want to be
choosy about what links he listed. If he listed too many of the
mediocre ones, then he would simply be replicating the function of
the powerful search programs on the Web and adding to people’s
“information overload, ” to use an ever-popular phrase.
Software already let sophisticated Netfolks zero in on items of
interest. Merely by typing in the word “toys, ” for example, I could
find scads of listings—from mentions of adult sex toys to the Web

site advertising the gun that fired Ping-Pong balls. And these
programs would soon be simple enough for even technoklutzes to
use. So the Lilienfelds had better offer something that the software
could not supply: Their judgments about which Web sites,
newsgroups, and mailing lists were the most fun or most
informative.
All through the Christmas season, JoAnn kept refining her Net -
related plans. “We need to ask, ‘Have we chosen the right items? ’”
she said. “The draw of our toy store is, it’s an exciting place to shop.
We have to do the same on the Internet. If we add more items, it
will approach a catalogue more. Right now our competition is mail -
order catalogues, and we have a lot of items that they’re not
offering. Maybe we’ll be reaching people not on the traditional
catalogue list. They could be more occasional toy buyers than
frequent toy buyers. ”
Thanks to a computerized inventory system, JoAnn’s corporeal
store carried more than 6, 500 items. Bob made a mental note: He
might want to put more of them on the Net so customers would
enjoy a wider selection. JoAnn talked about her suppliers: “My goal
was really getting this up and going for Christmas. When I get to the
toy fair I’ll discuss this with the national sales managers and see if I
can’t get discounts for advertising to so many people, and then
we’re working probably toward next Christmas. We’ll be working
toward fourth quarter of ’95. ”
That was a healthy attitude. Even toward the end of the season
the number of visits didn’t go past 2, 000 a week, and only a handful
of actual sales resulted. The only customers were Luciana Gores;
Stuart Lowry, the computer jock turned family man; Michael Wolfe, a
West Virginia professor studying Internet commerce, who ordered
half a dozen stuffed toy caterpillars; a second academic, in the
Midwest, who bought a Ravensburger Snail’s Pace Race game; a
Massachusetts woman sending three customizable dolls to her sister
( “I’m testing business on the Net—aren’t you lucky? ” ); and David
Fry, the operator of a cybermall nearby who was curious about the
White Rabbit, and who bought First Blocks.

Not that the Lilienfelds had completely wasted their time. As of
Christmas, a Wall Street Journal story hadn’t appeared, but the
Detroit paper and others had gone ahead with articles, and
customers poured onto the floor of the real White Rabbit, one even
buying the giant polar bear that Bob had been hoping to give his
nine-year-old son. The publicity may have brought in some
$20,000-$25,000 in extra sales by Bob’s estimates, on which the
Lilienfelds may have netted around $2,000—compared to $750 gross
and $75 net from Net orders. Bob told me that other merchants on
the Web were also reporting a low number of sales. The week
before Christmas the number of visits to White Rabbit itself actually
declined; many of the prospective customers had been logging on
from school or work, and now they had partly emptied the Web
along with their dorm rooms and offices.
From a get-rich-quick perspective, then, the virtual White Rabbit
had been a zero. Bob and JoAnn were smart marketers with MBAs
from a Big Ten business school, and he had a real feel for the
Internet, which he had successfully used to expand his consulting
business. But even the Lilienfelds could not score right away. Oh,
how tantalizing the gargantuan numbers had been—the tens of
millions of users said to exist; the million by which the Net was
supposed to be growing each month. And yet in the end, when the
time came for customers to key in the credit card numbers, the
market had vanished like the Cheshire cat. That didn’t mean the
Lilienfelds were foolish; just a week or two after Christmas, a
wonderful twist happened. The number of visits to the toy store fell
off. But sales leapt up. By mid-January White Rabbit was moving an
average of a toy a day—not a Kmart volume, but an improvement.
Bob explained the difference. Now White Rabbit’s first screen told
customers that the store could often get toys not mentioned online.
Encouraged, Lilienfeld added yet another improvement, an 800
number. Now customers could ask their questions the old-fashioned
way if they preferred, and they could also order by voice if they
didn’t trust the Net with their credit card numbers.
With enough tweaks like this, the virtual toy store might
eventually flourish as the number of Web users grew. Just like the

characters in many children’s stories, the White Rabbit would keep
on changing—adding ever-more-intriguing links to newsgroups and
other Web sites, putting in the software to help novice toy shoppers
choose just the right ball or train set, figuring out new ways to use
the interplay between the Net and the traditional media. Sooner or
later, the Netheads would reproduce, and when they went looking
for rattles and Lego sets, Bob and JoAnn would be ready for them.
The story of White Rabbit Toys, like that of the Internet itself, was
far from over.
The Electronic Billboard: Grant’s
Flowers
Larry Grant just might be doing better at the moment than the
Lilienfelds were. He was selling flowers, and what better
merchandise existed for grad students who were alone at the
keyboard in a dark office at two o’clock, and who had forgotten their
girlfriends’ birthdays?
A newsletter publisher named Rosalind Resnick—a former staff
reporter for the Miami Herald and the author of an Internet business
guide—was grossing more than $ 20, 000 a year in subscriptions and
[ 2. 4 ] expecting to do much better in 1995. And her media-oriented
newsletter helped pave the way for a lucrative consulting business. I
also knew of a network expert named Gordon Cook who was able to
jet to a three-week research expedition in Moscow at his own
expense, and who lived satisfactorily on the revenue from The Cook
[ 2. 5 ] Report on Internet and related activities.
Grant’s Flowers, however, was more of a typical business. Larry
Grant wasn’t a writer. And his work was not as network-related as
that of Resnick and Cook; unlike the latter, he hadn’t evolved into a
net. personality on some key mailing lists. Instead the word was that

Larry Grant just paid his $28 a month to an electronic mall—a
collection of stores that shared a common subarea of the Net—and
sat back and watched his fax machine spew out orders. Grant might
not be Davy Crockett in terms of action, but certainly in terms of
fame he was coming along. He had appeared as a success story,
after all, on the front page of the New York Times business section.
As I wended my way through the Net to Grant’s Flowers, I passed
through an area called Branch Mall. A logo with a tree branch
greeted me. I saw listings for enterprises ranging from cosmetic
sellers to H&H Logging and Timber Company. Under “Flowers,
Gifts, Foods,” I didn’t see just Grant’s listing. I saw White Dove
Flower and Gift Shop, Flowers on Lexington, Exotic Flowers of
Hawaii, Bonsai Boy of New York, and half a dozen others. Bob
Lilienfeld was skeptical about cybermalls, and right now I could see
why. With all this competition, could Grant’s make money off the
Internet?
Lilienfeld had reminded me that traditional malls and the cyber
variety were different, and I understood. If I wanted to shop for
books, I could brave traffic to reach Springfield Mall, a large
collection of shops maybe ten miles from me in the suburbs of
Washington, D. C. Springfield would be worth the drive. I could visit
four stores right within a five-minute walk of each other—Brentano’s,
B. Dalton, Walden, and Crown.
The Net, however, was also different. I didn’t have to drive
anywhere. I could just use a powerful search engine such as Lycos,
key in “bookstore,” and watch name after name pop up on my
screen. Lycos demanded just a little technical savvy. But easier
alternatives would come along. As if that weren’t enough, Netfolks
put together lists of activities on the Internet, and often they
included commercial categories. I’d found White Rabbit not through
advertising but through the Yahoo list out of Stanford University, on
the other side of North America. Distance just didn’t matter. So could
the shopping mall metaphor truly work out to the benefit of
merchants such as Larry Grant?
Branch Mall at the very least had set Grant up in style. The
opening screen was attractive and helpful to buyers, with such

basics as: “Different areas of the country sometimes have different
prices or may be unable to supply certain flowers. For example, New
York City has high rents and costs of doing business, so flowers are
more expensive there....” And then below I saw a list of the offerings
—for example, “One dozen boxed long stem roses. A fragrant
classic. $49.95 to $99.95.” In the virtual version of the White Rabbit
toy store you couldn’t rattle the toys, and in Branch Mall you couldn’t
smell the roses, but like the Lilienfelds, Branch Mall had been
generous with pictures of the merchandise. I loved some little
touches. Branch had given Grant a reminder service into which you
could key your spouse’s birthday or some other date, before which
an e-mail note would be sent to jog you to do your duty.
The selection was varied. You could order everything from the
roses to “a get well soup cup containing button mums, daisies, mini
carnations, standard carnations, monte casino, statice, and a
package of chicken soup. $26.” All in all, I felt that this area was
even better laid out than White Rabbit Toys, where the opening
page, though far, far above average, didn’t communicate quite as
much information as I’d have liked. As with White Rabbit, you could
order online by filling out an electronic form.
Missing from the virtual version of Grant’s flower shop, however,
were the customized links that helped give the White Rabbit Toys its
personality and made it a true part of the Net. If Larry Grant had
been as at home in cyberspace as Rob Lilienfeld was, he could have
added links to love-oriented discussion areas or to poetry—perhaps
even the Shakespearean variety.
But instead this Web page was serving just as an electronic
billboard with an ordering mechanism. I didn’t even see a
photograph of the store. When the New York Times published a
photo of a Mosaic screen, it had superimposed a picture of Grant
amid his flowers and dressed in an apron with an FTD insignia.
Couldn’t a similar photo have adorned his Web area?
For that matter, the store didn’t even offer an electronic mail
address, just a phone number for customers with questions. This
isn’t to criticize Larry Grant. He was not an honorary techie as Bob

Lilienfeld was. Like Lilienfeld, however, Grant was an intelligent,
diligent Midwest businessman who saw the Net as an opportunity.
Wild talk about Grant notwithstanding, he wasn’t a braggart—
simply a proud family entrepreneur. I learned that Grant’s Flowers
was actually part of a mini local conglomerate. “We’ve been here
since 1947,” he said, “and my folks started farming and selling
produce by the side of the road off a kitchen table. We’re now a
million-dollar business and have many facets. We have a flower and
gift shop, and the front of the building is beer and foods. We farm
131 acres.” Two brothers were in the business, and so was his
eighty-year-old mother. “She runs the flower and gift section, and I
run the rest of the retail sales and my brothers do all the growing
and production. We’ve got two acres of greenhouses growing plants
for spring sale or gardeners. It’s a very diversified operation.”
Grant clearly wasn’t making a living off the Internet alone, despite
a good start. “We got online in February just before Valentine’s Day
and we received forty orders that week. In the first ten days we had
over 2,900 look in on our electronic storefront. Then it dropped to
one or two orders a day, and then we got to Mother’s Day and had a
high of forty in one day. Currently we’ve increased from one or two
to six, in that range.”
When I asked what his current Net-related gross would be per
year, he roughly estimated it at perhaps $15,000 or $20,000. That
was enough to make the Web area well worth his time, but this was
hardly a tale of instant riches. I remembered a magazine ad—for
would-be providers of Internet services—that showed a mustached
man beside a Rolls or Mercedes. Larry Grant was a Web merchant,
not someone hooking people up with the Net. But I wished that the
get-rich-quickers of all stripes could see Larry Grant as a realistic
example of the Net’s promise. The gold might come eventually, and
it was worthwhile to chase after it by going online, but, for most
people, the big money wasn’t there yet.
What’s more, costs for newer customers of Branch Mall were
higher. Grant had been the first merchant there and enjoyed a
break. Now Branch was charging thousands a year for Web areas
that included elaborate programming and creative work.[2.6]

Larry Grant, in any event, believed in the Net and in the Mall itself.
His virtual operation wasn’t costing him that much, and I suspected
that even with somewhat higher expenses, other tenants might do
fine in the end if they were in the right business. “Number one,”
Grant said, “we don’t have to take and buy more inventory. Number
two, we don’t have to have a bigger facility. And number three, we
don’t need a sales staff. We can do with the staff we have in
handling these orders. It’s a neat way to find new business. I don’t
have to handle any of the products directly. The customer does all
the ordering through the company in his area and it’s shipped from
the company to them, and I get my commission check at the end of
the month.” He liked the concept so much that he started a Fuller
Brush franchise on the Net. The same key principles applied: No
inventory to worry about and no sales staff, just some dealings with
Branch and orders emerging from a fax machine.
Merchants like Bob Lilienfeld might fare well without a cybermall
involved—they knew how to spread word about themselves on the
Net by way of newsgroups and mailing lists—but I could also see the
possibilities for people such as Larry Grant as long as they kept their
expectations to a reasonable level. Grant himself didn’t view the
other flower shops at Branch Mall as direct competitors; he depicted
himself as more of a general florist than the others, what with their
specialties in Hawaiian flowers and the like. Certainly a good
cybermall, like the brick-and-concrete version, needed a good tenant
mix—with a toy store not appearing on the same screen as, say, a
sex toy shop.
If that right mix wasn’t around, why have the mall in the first
place? While it was true that the Net shrank distances, it did take
time to move from screen to screen at typical modem speeds. And
yet, reflecting, I could indeed see a future for malls. Even when
search engines were easier to use, people might still not avail
themselves of them—preferring to browse instead. So the mall
concept might well endure to the advantage of people like Larry
Grant.
All kinds of people itched for their percentages of the cybermall
business. Jon Zeeff, the mall operator who had set up Larry Grant

with his electronic billboard, had once written medical software.
David Fry was a Harvard Ph. D. in computer science, came from a
family in the printing business, and ran an offshoot called Fry
Multimedia. Ann Arbor wasn’t Silicon Valley, but just in that one
university town, at least three local business people were on the
Web in a serious way, if you included Bob Lilienfeld. Like him, Fry
wisely thought in the long term. Drumming up business from well-
known brands such as Ragu spaghetti sauce, he did not promise an
instant audience in the millions. He urged companies to go on the
Web, experiment with interactive advertising, and make their
mistakes before the Net became a truly mass medium for Madison
Avenue.
Some get-rich-quickers, of course, also were jostling for virtual
tenants; even Canter and Siegel showed up by way of an area called
Cybersell, and I enjoyed the irony. C&S had carpet bombed
thousands of newsgroups with the same message—while
encouraging other merchants to ignore conventional Netiquette—and
yet now they were also relying on the more focused approach of a
Web area.
Phone companies, too, wanted to run malls on the World Wide
Web. And that created problems for some. While the Net might use
their phone lines, many of these corporations felt out of place in an
anarchistic environment over which they had far less than the
accustomed amount of control. In the mall business they would be
competing against nimble entrepreneurs like Zeeff and Fry. Still,
phone companies could take advantage of their existing networks to
one extent or another, and if the Yellow Pages were going online in a
new incarnation, then the Baby Bells and AT&T wanted their share
of the business. Of all the mall-related efforts in early 1995, the
most ambitious may have been from a phone company, MCI. It
exemplified—as I soon discovered in the most direct of ways—both
the best and the worst of Big Business on the Web.

MCI’s Giant Cybermall and the
Search For Darlene
MCI and the Internet had A History. The Net used phone lines
from many companies, but MCI had long been one of the major
players here; some 40 percent of the Internet traffic in the United
States passed over its cables, and nowadays the senior vice-
president of data architecture was none other than Vint Cerf. As
much as anyone he was Mr. Net, one of the founding fathers. MCI
also employed the head of a standard-setting body called the
Internet Engineering Task Force. Unsurprisingly, MCI marketers were
coming out with statements in the vein of: When you think Internet,
we want you to think of us.
I asked a product manager how much of the Net-related
commerce he could envision involving an electronic marketplace
from MCI. Well, he said, MCI had around one-fifth of the long-
distance business in the U. S.—and why not the same share on the
Internet?
Clearly, however, if MCI wanted to woo the Larry Grants of this
world, it faced a major marketing problem. Just like Jon Zeeff, it
would have to sell business people on the Net as a vehicle for their
messages; and that meant lots of education, not just hype. MCI,
moreover, was offering a range of services far, far broader than
Zeeff’s. In an MCI-perfect world, you would advertise your business
by way of marketplaceMCI. Prospective customers on the Net could
browse through a giant online directory and follow a link to your
electronic storefront. MCI would cleverly lure them to its area.
People would be able to retrieve voice phone numbers in far-off
cities and enjoy other information services for free.
On MCI’s planet, you’d of course use internetMCI for your
electronic mail and your Web browsing. You also could hold video
conferences during which people saw not only each other but the
same contract or spreadsheet, which they could jointly modify even
if they were thousands of miles apart. You could even receive
updates on your pet news topic by way of MCI—just the ticket for
keeping up with competitors or with a favorite athletic team.

Not all of MCI’s new services related to the Internet. But like
marketplaceMCI, many did. And even with 30 million people hooked
in by way of e-mail if nothing else, public ignorance was massive.
Larry Magid, a computer columnist, observed that even a single TV
show such as Home Improvement could attract greater numbers. If
MCI wanted to enjoy volume befitting a phone company, then, it had
better prepare for some major evangelizing—about both the Net and
non-Net services. MCI tried the broadcast model in the most
traditional of ways. Splashy commercials aired on national television.
They starred a fictitious publishing company, Gramercy Press, whose
president, Peter Hoffman, had a big crush on MCI. Whether the
service was video conferencing or electronic mail, Hoffman was
itching to open his wallet for it.
Darlene Davis was the character with the most air time, the hip
young receptionist who was waging a valiant battle to get Martin
Banks, the resident technophobe, online. If this portly old crank of
an editor wanted to read the latest memos from Darlene, then he
had better plug in his computer. Curtiss Bruno was the sales
manager with his heart on his quotas and Darlene. MCI’s electronic
services could allow him to achieve at least the former goal.
Nowadays Darlene happily used e-mail to help stay out of flirting
distance with him. Ellen de Rosset was the resident intellectual snob
and a Net browser. Reginald Gales used MCI’s news feature to keep
Martin up on cricket scores. Marta Dragelov was an info junky in
keeping with her duties as a fact checker.
In a country where fantasy and reality often turned into one big
mush, where O. J. Simpson movies could go into production before
the end of the murder trial, where legions of commercials aped news
programs, where the Speaker of the House would soon be hosting a
cable TV showing of Boys Town after having touted orphanages as a
major solution to the welfare problem—in a nation like this, it was as
inevitable as a $1 million book deal for O. J. that the mythical Darlene
would draw job offers and marriage proposals from people wanting
to be part of the fun.
“These were breakout and breakaway characters that took on a
life of their own,” said Mark Pettit, the MCI public relations man who

was handling Gramercy matters. What’s more, the company’s
advertising agency, MVBMS, hadn’t just tried to make Gramercy real
in the real world; the agency people had also made the characters
real in the video world by way of an introductory commercial that
looked like a preview of a new fall series.
Having conquered TV, then, and with the Internet a main focus of
the ad campaign, how could MCI not have opened up a Web area to
ballyhoo the same services that Darlene was pushing on the tube?
The commercials had whetted interest in the characters. And now
MCI would see if it could satisfy this curiosity while also passing on
more details about its new line of services. “People wanted more
than thirty seconds of information,” Pettit said, “and it can be hard to
give them more on TV. What if we turned this into a real place that
they could go visit? And that’s how it came to life.” By MCI’s own
estimate, more than a million people visited the “real place” in the
first six weeks or so. Even Bob Lilienfeld dropped by. He was an MCI
stockholder and wanted to keep an open mind despite his skepticism
about the mall concept—maybe he could do business with pros like
MCI’s. Lilienfeld filled out a form that offered a two-month trial of
Net-related services, and waited.
I first visited the Gramercy Press around the same time that
Lilienfeld did. The site popped up on my screen with color photos of
a perky-looking Darlene and friends. I saw a red logo, too. A small
“GP” appeared between “Gramercy” and “Press,” a nice little touch
that a real publisher might have tried. I wondered what ambitions
MCI had. Might it turn the fictitious GP into a commercial publisher
someday? The screen said Gramercy was “The World’s First Virtual
Publishing House,” and across the top I saw color photos of Darlene
and friends, all looking as real as ever. If I’d been impatient for a
hard sell, I could have clicked immediately on items such as
“network Business” or “MCI Telecommunications, Inc.”
But like the rest of the cosmos, I was more keen on reading some
virtual gossip from virtual humans. In a primitive way, reminiscent of
many a best-seller, a teaser led me on. I learned that the people of
Gramercy were “working on secret projects, curt memos, random
thoughts, Machiavellian power plays,” and that I might “even browse

a clandestine love letter or two about to be sent via e-mail across
the corridor.”
So I clicked, with much anticipation, on “Gramercy Press.” Against
a dark, purplish-blue sky I saw a semiornate, low-rise office building,
the same one featured in the TV commercial. Not to leave anything
to chance, a caption told me about tweeds and patches and old
pipes and the fact that “every one—from the receptionist to the
president himself—is online via networkMCI Business.” Despite the
clichés such as the stereotypical reference to tweeds, this site was
clearly showing far more imagination than the usual WWW area did.
“Now,” the screen told me, “click on any window and you’ll start to
get a feel of the inside workings of a major New York publishing
concern.”
I chose a pane on the top floor and saw Darlene near her
keyboard, smiling away and looking as if I’d caught her in the middle
of an intense gossip session. The screen suggested that I click for
audio. I did and downloaded a short snippet. “I love technology,” she
said in a high-pitched, girlish voice, and giggled a little nervously as
if to tell the world, “Hey, I’m a real person, not an actress taping an
ad.”
The text on the screen was credibly self-promotional: “I’m a
combination of a staff psychiatrist, gopher, organizer, coffee maker,
ruffled-feather soother, astrologer, party organizer, invitation sender,
flower orderer, delivered-lunch acceptor, and philosopher. Oh yes, I
also disseminate messages. A job made infinitely easier thanks to e-
mailMCI. I threw out those little pink message pads. e-mailMCI is so
much more efficient. I just click on my computer and the message
gets to the right person instantly. Whether they call back is up to
them. Hey, I can’t be their conscience, mother, and etiquette
professor too. I wear enough hats. And I have many aptitudes. For
instance, I was college skiing champ. You didn’t know that about
me. Nor did you know I have a master’s degree in medieval
literature. Or that Ellen de Rosset is going to need an editorial
assistant. Of course, she doesn’t know it yet either.”
I moved on to Darlene’s e-mail by clicking on, yes, her monitor.
And suddenly I was getting another pitch from MCI in the cleverest

of ways—I saw a screen shot of a menu from e-mailMCI, complete
with such commands as “Compose, ” “Forward, ” and “Reply. ”
Beneath the menu appeared a message list:
E. de Rosset Short Story Submissions
C. Bruno Excellent Proposition
R. Gales Cover Art Submissions
M. Dragelov Interesting Facts
P. Hoffman Free at Last
I opened the e-mail. Ellen de Rosset was complaining that “My
office has more manuscripts than the Library of Alexandria—I’m
running out of room for me. Could people submit their stories over
the Internet instead of through the mail? ” Reginald Gales wrote that
he’d sent out a fax to computer artists, asking for submissions; and
in fact MCI was offering to post the works of electronic artists, not
just writers. Under the subject line “Excellent Proposition, ” Curtiss
Bruno asked: “Hey Darlene, want to come by and check out the
romance section of our newest catalog? ” Funny. The TV commercials
had led me to believe he might be tiring of the chase. Marta
Dragelov passed on some funny trivia from a book she was
researching. Peter Hoffman announced that he would be out of the
office the next week but would be keeping in touch with electronic
mail.
So, yes, I could read the same e-mail as Darlene could. But that
still wasn’t full interactivity. I wanted a two-way, and the “Compose”
command intrigued me; perhaps I could e-mail the crew behind the
Darlene character. I wrote that I was a real writer, working on a real
book, for a real publisher; could they please tell me what kind of
responses the people at Gramercy Press were getting over the
Internet? And how about Darlene?
“What’s she like? ” I was thinking. “How’d those people choose
her? Does she enjoy computers? Has she been on the Net? ” Once I
established contact with the virtual Darlene’s keepers, perhaps I
could find out.

Having already snooped at Darlene’s e-mail, I went on to the
offices of the other characters. Ellen de Rosset, a dark-haired woman
dressed in black, confided that she had corrected her seventh-grade
teacher’s grammar. “I read War and Peace when I was fifteen. The
complete works of Balzac before I was twenty-five. I think you get
the picture. So I am not happy that I was given the assignment to
edit this ‘women in sports’ book. I dislike sports rather intensely. The
only sport I know anything about, really, is fencing. But one must be
flexible these days, and the MCI Business software makes this
assignment easier to handle, if not more palatable. ”
Reginald Gales told me how MCI’s e-mail and conferencing
services came in handy. One of his authors lived on a caboose in
Wyoming, while another wrote from a houseboat in Florida; “he
once had a shark bite off his TV antenna. ”
Marta Dragelov, the fact checker, was an avid user of MCI’s news -
flash service, which crammed her computer with such items as,
“India Asks Phone Firms to Set Up Local Factories”—actual news
stories that I could see while clicking on them. Peter Hoffman was
away at home and working in his pajamas. Martin Banks, the
technophobic editor, said he was “being tutored on the wonders of
MCI electronic office ephemera by none other than Miss Ellen
de Rosset. ” He hoped that she would notice his new pair of wing tips.
The real payoff for readers was in Curtiss Bruno’s office. Wearing a
striped shirt and a tie and looking like an incurable office politician,
he nevertheless held a hand over his mouth as if to say: “Maybe I’d
better shut up before I spill too much. ” Oh, Curtiss, why bother? I
could tour an electronic version of the not-quite-completed winter
catalogue—with listings of fiction, visual arts, poetry, and nonfiction.
All categories carried dates older than the Web area itself—MCI
was apparently relying on imaginary contributors to prime the
pumps. “Ivana di Tommaso’s” background just seemed too New
Yorker-ish. She had “grown up in Bologna, Italy, and Grosse Pointe,
Michigan” and had “developed from a quiet film student” to “one of
America’s fine short story writers. ” If she existed, the electronic
catalogue at the Library of Congress had yet to note it when I made
a short detour by way of my software’s task-switching capability. Not

that I trusted the catalogue. A branch of Random House had
published my first book, The Silicon Jungle, yet it was missing from
the LC catalogue that day; and for all I knew, maybe the librarians
had also neglected the accomplished Ms. di Tommaso. I charitably
allowed for the fact that she just might exist.
Her story, “The Legend of Wendell County, ” told how a county
records keeper had become a community grandmother who, not
content to record births, deaths, and divorces, tried her hand at
marriage counseling and other social workish pursuits—until one day
she lost her way in winter and turned into something else, a ghost.
The bottom of the page carried an authentic-looking “© 1994 Ivana
di Tommaso. ”
I moved on. “The Tree House” was a story from Katy Rudder, a
member of “the first Peace Corps class ever assigned to China,
where she is teaching English at Leshan Teachers College in the
Sichuan Province. ” Based on what I was reading, MCI’s artistic tastes
—or its ad agency’s—were corporately wholesome. And so were its
contributors. I doubted that Gramercy would have been the best
place for the young Burroughs or Kerouac.
Perhaps this would change, maybe Gramercy would grow more
adventurous with time, but right now I wasn’t sanguine in that
regard. The nonfiction area was a real loss with just one title, of a
harmless, theological type. I doubted that this would be the place
for, say, Seymour Hersh or Robert Caro. Like the writing, the art
looked competent and maybe much better, but, again, safely within
corporate parameters.
The most cautious contributors were MCI’s lawyers, or whoever
else had written the legalese for one Web site. All writers and artists
had to send in releases saying they wouldn’t sue MCI for using
accidentally similar material. The lawyers warned, “All work that is
submitted electronically over the Internet needs to be accompanied
by a hard copy of the release form, sent in separately by postal mail.
We will not look at any work placed on our server until we have
received the hard copy of the release form. All files on the server
older than 14 days, for which we have not received a release, will
not be reviewed.... ” I remembered the essay on theology. It was

uninspired enough for an attorney other than Scott Turow to have
written it, and sure enough, the author’s note said he was “happy
with the practice of law.”
Despite the less-than-striking short stories and the soporific essay,
I loved the sparkle of Gramercy Press as a whole. I recalled an area
on the Web known as Bianca’s Smut Shack. Its creators let you get
inside the head of a virtual woman, let you know what books she
read, what movies she watched, what records she listened to, and
you could add your own opinions. At the time I’d told the Shack
crew, “Watch out, folks. Don’t be surprised if a big company creates
characters in an ad where everyone buys the right products.” Well, it
had happened. And MCI and its advertising agency had done many
good things that people with their resources could more easily
accomplish.
Building Notre Dame, thousands of workers had pieced together
the stone, fashioned the gargoyles, assembled the stained-glass
windows. And the MCI Web area, while hardly art, was somewhat
like a cathedral. The area’s masterminds had bungled in some ways,
but they had used sheer staff power to toil over countless details.
I was sorry when Mark Pettit told me that some Real People in
Publishing had hated Gramercy Press. Didn’t they get it? Granted,
the publishing company was stereotypical to the point of being self-
satirizing. But so what? I was no more expecting MCI to be a first-
rate publisher than I was expecting Random House to lay fiber-optic
cable.
As a display of the Web’s potential to attract a mass audience, of
course, the Gramercy endeavor had triumphed. For consumer
business on the Net to take off, ads would have to be a complete
departure from those on television, and MCI had done just that—
even if it was able to benefit from characters from the older
medium. Many small-timers could never have discovered an actress
as perfectly suited to play Darlene as Katy Selverstone was. This was
a real coup. MCI was brilliantly drawing in a big crowd through a
skillful interplay of television, print, and the Net.
Selverstone herself had become a living ad for MCI, drawing stare
after stare as she walked down the Manhattan streets. Her Gramercy

role was a real tribute to her acting ability. Entertainment Weekly
described her as not “much of a gadget-head. ‘I’ve got a 12-inch,
black-and-white TV that emits a faint gaseous odor,’ she says. ‘And I
have to change channels with a pair of pliers.’” The word from MCI
was that she’d just bought a computer and would herself be on the
Net. Advertisers hired models today on the basis of looks and I
wondered if, in the future, they would consider the ability to give
good chat online.
A major problem, however, arose with this scenario in MCI’s case.
While I hadn’t asked for an interview or e-mail from the real
Darlene, I had yet even to hear from her handlers after six weeks.
These people had wooed me with a first-class Web area and
encouraged me to write in, and yet they had then ignored me except
for a little boilerplate from their Darlene-bot, who said she was busy
coping with “emergencies.” The MCI media crew reinforced my
skepticism; only after a series of phone calls was I able to pry basic
information. On a day when Pettit solemnly promised he’d talked to
me, he was off holding a press conference for the Wall Street
Journal and the other usual suspects without alerting me about the
postponement. Clearly this was a big company focused on other big
companies, and I wondered if the small merchants in the Web area
might suffer if they entrusted their fates to MCI. I myself was not
just a writer. I made it clear that I was also a customer of MCI Mail,
an electronic mail service to which I had subscribed for a decade.
Perhaps someday I might even want a Web area through MCI. And
this was the treatment I got?
If MCI slighted me—a writer-customer who spoke out in print and
on the Net, and who had many friends there—how would it treat the
Larry Grants of the future? I thought of the elusive, virtual character
who had asked me to write to her. In a metaphorical sense, small
merchants might futilely spend their days searching for Darlene.
Now I wondered about Bob Lilienfeld. How was he coming along
with his own information request? Was there any chance that White
Rabbit might end up in an electronic mall after all? Lilienfeld, albeit
not a mall booster, was in many ways a good prospect since he was

so Net oriented and could appreciate a good deal. Why, he even
owned stock in MCI.
Efficiently, however, MCI had alienated Bob Lilienfeld. Just like me,
he had not heard a peep out of the company, even after filling out a
form for his two months of trial services. He had followed up with
three e-mail notes to an address set aside for prospects like him. I
told MCI’s media people about this mini-debacle and was assured
that someone would contact Lilienfeld. But after several weeks, no
one had. MCI was nicely apologetic, of course. Mark Pettit and
colleagues reminded me of the huge number of people who had
replied to the Gramercy Press ad. They said, too, that MCI technical
people were busy at work answering questions, while creative types
handled the correspondence for Darlene. But they were missing the
point. This was a massive advertising campaign, and they should
have planned for success as well as failure.
The issue should not have had anything to do with corporate size.
MCI could have requested zip codes and states and sorted out
Darlene’s e-mail in that way—for area sales reps to answer if her
handlers in New York were swamped. In fact, the form that Lilienfeld
filled out did ask for his postal address. It also inquired, “What
interests you?” so that, during the two-month trial, MCI could mail
him news stories through the new automatic clipping service. “You
can choose any topic: your competition’s advertising, the future of
your industry, or southwestern cooking, anything,” MCI had assured
him. And yet, after six weeks, he hadn’t received a single call or
piece of literature.
As if that weren’t enough of an outrage, MCI’s fees might
overwhelm many small business people. MCI wanted to charge some
$2,000 a month for getting them on the World Wide Web—or at
least several times what many independent malls would have billed.
Yes, MCI talked about adding value through its brand name and
through customer draws such as directory services for the Net and
for voice. It would even line up copywriters for the storefronts. But
what good would this do merchants whose volumes simply did not
justify such expenditures? Pettit reminded me that a quarter-page
listing in a phone directory cost $2,000. But that wasn’t true in many

areas, and most merchants did not take out that much space
anyway. Even then the typical business person might hire an extra
clerk, and perhaps have money left over for advertising with a
smaller cybermall. That, of course, was projecting into the future.
After all, even Larry Grant wasn’t grossing more than $15,000-
20,000 a year at the time, and the Lilienfelds had a long climb ahead
to reach that level.
Perhaps MCI would learn. I still loved the sparkle of the Gramercy
area and hoped that it would thrive in the end. Regardless of my
doubts and frustrations, I hadn’t anything against the people of MCI,
especially Mark Pettit, who, despite his absentmindedness, had
actually been more helpful than the others. MCI wasn’t Canter and
Siegel. It hadn’t disrupted Usenet. As long as it paid its own way and
did not take advantage of its Net connections in ways that stifled
competition—Washington needed to monitor MCI closely—then it
could actually help the average Net user. The greater the volume on
the Net, the greater would be the virtual pipeline and the lower the
cost for everyone. So, far from disliking MCI’s interest in the
commercial promise of the Net, I still saw plenty of potential here.
MCI simply needed to understand the obvious. If its electronic
marketplace were to succeed, then the company must price its
services more realistically and not keep customers searching for
Darlene.
Federal Express and Right-O-
Way:
Absolutely, Positively on the Net
A FedEx woman called me up and asked what the people in
Memphis could do to retain my business, which had plummeted to
almost zero volume. “You’ve given me great service,” I said, thinking
of all the foot-to-throttle occasions when FedEx had picked up

manuscripts on deadline. “But you see, I’m on the Internet
nowadays. Everything for my current book project goes ever the
wire.” I was working on a guide telling how to lobby for one’s
political beliefs online, and the publisher had even received the book
proposal via the Net. Lots of people were doing the same, not just
with the Net but with commercial services and fax. On legal lists,
some lawyers were debating the validity of electronic mail for
business matters, but the new technology would quiet the discussion
soon enough when foolproof, digital signatures could establish the
identity of the sender.
No one needs to weep for FedEx, United Parcel Service, and the
rest, however. The typical computer is a medium-sized box full of
parts that come in much smaller boxes, such as a disk drive or a
modem. And, as shown by the thickness of Computer Shopper and
other magazines that cater to computer users buying from afar,
FedEx and similar services are thriving. That is just one example.
High-tech companies, especially the network kind, want reputations
for reliability and fast turnarounds. They love the FedEx slogan:
“When it absolutely, positively, has to be there overnight.” Courier
services are godsends for corporations that rely on just-in-time
delivery to reduce inventories of spare parts. If nothing else, this
principle appeals to manufacturers with slim inventories. Also, more
and more people are working at home. At the same time, upscale
consumer magazines abound with ads touting merchandise via
express, everything from steaks to flowers.
The real question, then, isn’t how to downsize but rather how to
cope with the deluge of business in small packages. And Federal
Express views the Internet as among the more promising of many
possibilities.
For years, FedEx used its own network to set up computer links
through which high-volume, Fortune 500 companies could request
pickups, track shipments, and receive invoices. First, FedEx
communicated with mainframes. Then it began supplying some
customers with personal computers; eventually, some companies
shipping as few as three packages a day could qualify. “We started
with the biggest customers first and then extended that service to

smaller and smaller companies, ” said Robert Hamilton, a marketer at
FedEx dealing with information matters. The next move was
supplying tracking software through which people could use their
own machines to dial up FedEx. Step by step, FedEx was working to
get almost all customers online to its computers—even the operators
of small home businesses.
The Internet could play an important role here because it is the
closest thing to a universal computer network. By the mid-1990s
people in the air freight business caught on to the advantages of the
Net over the proprietary networks in many cases. The Internet
reached scores of countries, no small advantage in an internationally
oriented business, and planners could use the Net’s volume to help
slash the costs of telecommunications and improve service to
customers. Right-O-Way, a freight forwarder in Tustin, California,
was among the Net pioneers. Back in 1992 the company had figured
out how to use customers’ personal computers to print out bar code
labels.
With portable radio-frequency scanners linked to the firm’s
mainframe, Right-O-Way’s workers could track shipments for
customers—could, in other words, offer the same services that Ex
could. Right-O-Way’s customers dialed up the company directly
rather than through the Internet. But in 1994, Martin Hubert, vice
president of information systems, hooked Right-O-Way into the Net
for customers wanting to use it. He spent just $ 1, 000 on additional
UNIX software, modems, network setup charges, and programming
time, and $ 350 a month in Internet-related bills.
“Some customers have tried it already, ” Hubert said. “We have
sales people use the Internet to access shipping data. Our advanced
overseas partners can access our computer directly for e-mail,
tracking, and tracing. Customers like BMW, ClothesTime, and
Packard Bell access our computer and save money on long-distance
[ 2. 7 ] charges from overseas. ” Those companies could reach the Right -
O-Way computer directly, getting immediate answers while they
were online. Using the Net, they could even schedule shipments.
Right-O-Way told me that it protected account numbers by requiring

customers to use passwords that they received through sales reps
and ways other than the Internet.
What’s more, the company served even customers having only the
most basic of Internet connections. Yes, you could Telnet into the
Right-O-Way computer system on the Internet—could issue
commands as if you were at a keyboard at headquarters. But if you
lacked Telnet capabilities and didn’t mind the delay, you could also
send electronic mail messages in the appropriate format to track
shipments or issue pickup orders.[2.8]
Around the same time, FedEx and other industry giants were
gearing up to do business on the Internet. The Net, of course,
wasn’t the only possibility. Federal Express by then was an old hand
at using its own network, which at the time accounted for more than
50 percent of the packages shipped. It was also distributing
Windows and Mac software to enable tracking through the FedEx
net. Just the same, in December 1994, after having earlier
experimented with the Net for the distribution of press releases,
FedEx turned to the Internet’s World Wide Web as a way for
customers to track packages. Within FedEx’s Web area, they could
key in the number of the package and get the latest information.
I checked out the Web service. At www. fedex. com I saw “FedEx”
in big purple and orange letters, along with a short, easy menu that
led me to electronic forms. A detour offered “Interesting Facts about
FedEx!” It was the “world’s largest express transportation company,”
had 1994 revenues of $8.5 billion, employed “more than 505,515
worldwide,” served 191 countries, owned more than 400 aircraft
ranging from 32 Fokker F-27s to 5 Airbuses and 13 McDonnell
Douglas MD-11s, operated “more than 32,560 vehicles, and shipped
an average of more than 2 million packages each day.” Another
menu item could tell me about pickup availability. If I typed in the
time I would have a shipment ready to go, my zip code, and the
destination code, among other items, then FedEx would tell me how
soon it could deliver the package using Priority Overnight Service or
alternatives.
Right now, however, I wanted to learn the whereabouts of a test
package—containing nothing more than Robert Hamilton’s business

card—that went out under airbill number 50044562. It was a no -
brainer. I chose “Select Track a FedEx Package” and keyed in the
number. Almost immediately I learned when a courier had picked up
the package and when it had left Memphis. And eventually the Web
would pass on other facts such as the name of the driver at the
destination, the delivery time, and who signed for the package. An
idea hit me. When you filled out an express form in the future,
perhaps you could give both your recipient’s e-mail address and your
own. Via the Net, a service could tell the other person that a
package was on the way—and after it arrived, you’d automatically
receive a receipt.
Even as the FedEx area existed now, however, it was serving
customer needs well. Yes, I appreciated the flash of MCI’s efforts,
and I understood why Darlene and friends were attracting many
more people than the courier company was right now. But compared
to MCI, FedEx left me feeling better. Those modest little electronic
forms, the ones that would let me track packages and check out Ex’s
service availability by location and time, treated the customers as
individuals and responded in seconds. MCI, however, ignored Bob
Lilienfeld, who, disgusted, later sold his stock.
On top of everything else, MCI, which had vastly more
programming talent than FedEx did, had missed out on some major
opportunities for interactive software. I could imagine a small
company keying in a description of its telecommunications and
network requirements and getting a series of at least basic
recommendations. On a package-by-package basis and in the most
private of ways, FedEx was doing this already—since its forms
queried you about your shipping needs of the moment and then told
you what services were available. The people at MCI weren’t dumb.
They could turn around their operation in a flash—they might have
done so by the time you read this—but in terms of customer service
FedEx was clearly the winner right now.
“Five years from now, ” said Robert Hamilton, “35 or 40 percent of
the customers connected to FedEx could be using the Internet. ” His
company stood a good chance of saving millions in annual
communications costs and the expenses of staffing phones. “The big

factor is how individuals are connected today, ” he said. “With
CompuServe and America Online galloping in the direction of the
Internet, maybe that will happen sooner rather than later. ” FedEx
would let customer usage, not official corporate policy, drive its use
of the Net, and that is exactly how it should be. One way or another
the Net would definitely figure in its plans. The only question was,
“How much? ”
The big need now, of course, was for customers to be able to key
in their account numbers and get immediate pickups. FedEx did face
some challenges here. FedEx needed to blend the Internet into its
existing network of computers, and this complicated the security
issues. FedEx wanted to make certain that a cyberthief couldn’t go
on a joyride with an illegally obtained account number of a customer.
So it was evaluating security-enhanced software from CommerceNet,
a California organization that helped put businesses on the Net.
Meanwhile, we customers could not use the Net to schedule
shipments through Federal Express. FedEx had offered a temporary
solution: we could at least download software that let us call up the
company directly, or we could reach FedEx via America Online or
another commercial network. That would do for the moment.
Mulling over what I’d seen and heard up to now, I could not
escape three conclusions. First, it was clear that computer networks
could be a help, not a threat, to delivery companies that were trying
to upgrade service. No longer would I have to wait for an operator
to schedule a pickup or check on shipments from FedEx. The second
conclusion was broader: The Net often could be good for
corporations of all sizes, not just Fortune 500 firms like FedEx. Right -
O-Way had staked out its own place in cyberspace by going for the
simplest solution—Telnet and electronic mail—rather than worrying
first about the World Wide Web. The company could add the Web
later. On the Internet, with its inherent economies for the Right-O -
Ways of this world, “smaller” didn’t have to mean “backwards. ”
The third conclusion about these case histories resulted from my
comparisons of MCI and the courier companies, and it transcended
the fact that they were in different industries. Even on the Internet,
good customer service would have to be a company’s first priority

and counted even more than the technology per se. Oh, you could
use electronic forms. But unless you programmed the forms to
provide the right services—rather than simply trying to sell The
Product and awe the customers—you might actually alienate the
people you were trying to befriend. MCI didn’t understand this
sufficiently. FedEx and Right-O-Way did.
Intel: How the Net Helped Turn an
Advertising Sticker into a
Warning Label
The Internet, of course, can hurt as well as help business. Well
populated with skeptical academics—whose postings often find their
way onto the screens of equally skeptical journalists—the Net is a
good place to learn about scams. Legitimate companies, of course,
needn’t worry: They will benefit as word of their successful products
spreads, and the Net excels as a conduit for rumor control. Should
there ever be another Tylenol scare, you can bet that publicists will
use the Net to get the truth out. Even legitimate businesses,
however, can feel the wrath of the Net if they err—as Intel, the chip
maker, found out in the ugliest of ways after it released the Pentium
chip.
The Pentium chip was the new flagship product, the speedster
that would let PCs impinge on minicomputer territory. But that
wasn’t all. Intel envisioned the Pentium as the perfect chip for
computers aimed at the home market. No longer would Mom, Pop,
and The Kids poke along with computers weaker than those at the
office. Thanks to Intel, they would enjoy glitzy cartoons, educational
programs, and other multimedia offerings in full glory on their
machines at home. Intel launched a major TV campaign and
persuaded scores of computer makers to adorn their boxes and ads

with “Intel Inside” stickers. Intel was looking ahead to millions of
dollars of Christmas-related sales. At the time, I suspect, the
Internet didn’t figure that prominently in Intel’s plans. Its Net area
was hardly as dazzling or as ambitious as those of many other
companies. That would change.
The trouble started when a mathematics professor in Virginia
found that under certain conditions, the Pentium chip would make
mistakes in arithmetic. There at Lynchburg College, Dr. Thomas
Nicely couldn’t believe his screen. To his amazement, he was able to
verify that the chip, not the human, was at fault here. In October
1994 the professor’s “Bug in the Pentium” memo went out over the
Internet. It circulated rapidly from mailing list to mailing list, from
newsgroup to newsgroup, as well as on commercial nets such as
CompuServe and Prodigy.
Pentium-hostile messages flew back and forth between scientists,
corporate executives, consultants, and other influential people, who,
thanks to the Internet, could share complaints more efficiently than
ever. Intel tried some damage control via the Net and in press
statements. The heat reached the point where the head of Intel
asked a underling to issue an apology and a technical explanation.
The message betrayed corporate panic, pure and simple. “I am
posting from my home system,” Richard Wirt, Director of Software
Technology, prefaced a weekend note. And then came an “I am truly
sorry” message from Andy Grove, President of Intel. In various
statements Intel assured customers that the average computer user
would typically run across the problem once every 27,000 years. The
official line was that nontechnical people needn’t worry. Intel
announced it would replace chips if people could show that the
defect could harm their work.
That still didn’t placate the Net and the media. Netwise reporters
at papers such as the Washington Post and New York Times and at
Newsday warned the thousands of Christmas shoppers who were
about to buy $2,000 Pentium machines. Billions of dollars were at
stake here. Computer makers had already moved millions of Pentium
machines, and IBM came out with a statement saying that it would
replace defective chips—even though Intel kept claiming that the

nontechnical need not worry. It didn’t help when shoppers learned
that Intel knew about the Pentium’s defects as early as June.
What most threatened the Pentium, however, may have been the
humor. It started on the Net and, via mailing lists such as On-Line
News, reached major newspapers. David Letterman started cracking
jokes. Politicians and chips had something in common. If still quite
alive when Letterman ridiculed it, the Pentium was headed toward
the emergency room afterward—given the speed with which the
story was traveling around. On the Net itself, and on the front pages,
typical Pentium humor went something like this:
Q. “How many Pentium designers does it take to screw in a light
bulb?”
A. “1.99904274017, but that’s close enough for nontechnical
people.”
Q. “What do you get when you cross a Pentium PC with a
research grant?”
A. “A mad scientist.”
Q. “What’s another name for the “Intel Inside” sticker they put
on Pentiums?”
A. “The warning label.”
Maintaining to the end that this was more of a marketing problem
than a technical one, Intel relented. It agreed to replace chips for
free without interrogating the public. What’s more, Intel expanded
its presence on the Net. It now offered a nice area on the World
Wide Web with items ranging from product descriptions to job
announcements. Still, this fiasco aside, Intel had a good reputation
for quality control, and by not shrinking from the Net community, it
was responding correctly.
Another major lesson should also have sunk in among marketers
of all kinds—beyond the obvious fact that the Internet could spread
news of flawed products. Customers throughout the world could use
the same channels to find out about geographically based price
gouges. If a software firm charged reasonable prices in the United
States but boosted price tags for Europeans, then the Net would

spread the word. Software companies might not appreciate this
immediately, but sooner or later they would. This was especially true
of companies sending their products over the Net. The Internet
Adapter, the product that had proven to be so good to my wallet,
would have cost me $25 even if I’d lived in Antarctica or New
Zealand. I wondered how long it would be before the traditional
vendors of shrink-wrapped software would understand this lesson
and stop squeezing customers outside the United States. Even with
the expenses of middle people and translation factored in, the prices
of some American software products were too high in Europe.
Consumerism on the Net just might make the marketplace more
sane.
Other Hazards For
Business People
Not surprisingly, the old sixties people saw the Internet as a
victory of smallness over big corporations. Little companies could use
the Net in new and imaginative ways and woo prospects thousands
of miles away. Some enthusiasts promoted the Net as a powerful
weapon for individuals who hated life in sluggish, bloated
corporations.
Still, the Net might not always be a Nirvana for small
entrepreneurs. Consider the Lilienfelds. What if toy companies
decided to sell on the Net directly, for example? The Lilienfelds
themselves could still fare well since they were working hard to
become known for personal service. For example, if a toy weren’t
shown online, Bob might even scan in a photo from a wholesaler’s
catalogue and e-mail it to an interested buyer. And he and his wife
were planning to make themselves a conspicuous presence in
relevant newsgroups, while respecting netiquette. But not all of the
small merchants would be as astute and dedicated. I suspected that
many bankruptcies lay ahead.

Other problems might hit large as well as tiny companies. Many
customers refused to give their credit card numbers online; in fact,
many stores didn’t even want them. The Net wasn’t entirely secure.
Theoretically, snoops in a number of locations could intercept orders
and pick up the MasterCard or VISA numbers with software that
looked for common data associated with credit cards. I regarded this
as a temporary problem. Lilienfeld had dealt with it nicely by letting
people—at least those in the United States—phone in their credit
card numbers for free. The numbers would remain safe in White
Rabbit’s computers, ready for future transactions. Besides, as
Lilienfeld pointed out, it wasn’t worth the trouble for thieves to keep
a tab on small stores like his.
Bigger businesses, however, were right to worry, and solutions
were on the way. Popular browsers such as Netscape, for example,
were coming with security features. Customers would be able to
effortlessly transmit their credit card numbers in encoded form.
What about the problem of customers without sufficient funds to
pay for merchandise? Some Web merchants could almost instantly
verify that a customer had enough money in a credit account. The
process would be even easier if companies such as Microsoft
followed through with plans to team up with credit card companies.
But that still left another worry for customers—privacy.
If you use old-fashioned paper money, your transactions aren’t
traceable. With electronic money—or with regular credit or
conventional debit cards—they might be. What if you were a gay
woman, lived in a small Arkansas town, and enjoyed lesbian
literature? Or suppose that in the future you were caught up in a
divorce and your wife employed a cyberdetective to snoop on your
spending habits? DigiCash, a company in Amsterdam, thought it had
a solution in the form of anonymous electronic money that you could
spend without being traced. Only your digital banker would know for
sure. The possibility, of course, gave fits to tax collectors throughout
the world. It was one of the reasons why bureaucrats in the United
States had lobbied so hard for industry to adopt the Clipper chip,
which allowed federal snoops to break its codes. Clearly, however,
the Clipper effort could harm U. S. companies. Suppose foreign

governments used a similar approach—making it easier to steal
commercial secrets from American-owned multinationals?
Still another threat to business is from people who might spy on or
change data on corporate systems. Hackers got into General Electric
computers containing secrets. The solution to these electronic thefts,
in many cases, was stronger “firewalls”—electronic gateways
between public and private areas. In some instances, however, the
threat was exaggerated. Yes, in theory, hackers could turn your
home phone into a pay phone or make off with your corporate
password or spy on your electronic mail. And some hated
commercial activities on the Net and were ready to act. But by far,
these were exceptions: most of the better hackers were benign—
they saw themselves more as scholars than as snoops and
saboteurs. Indeed, old-timers would not use the word “hackers” to
describe the malevolent; no, they were “crackers.”
Ironically, on the Net, the real worry isn’t hackers but snoopy
competitors, who, without necessarily breaking the law, can find out
information about prices and new products much more efficiently
than before. A rival phone company has paid thousands and
thousands of visits to the MCI area on the Web. This must be going
on constantly. Earlier, Digital Equipment Corporation offered software
demonstrations over the Net and found that its competitors were
tying the machines up. More scrupulously, companies could use
powerful searching tools such as the Lycos on the Web to seek out
files mentioning rivals’ products. They could also send the names of
rivals to a computer at Stanford University. And then whenever a
company was mentioned in a major Usenet newsgroup, an electronic
clipping service would send the information back to them at no
charge. A careless engineer or marketer could jeopardize thousands
or millions in investments. The answer, of course, is to educate
people about the risks.
Not so controllable is the risk of companies using the Net to troll
for unfavorable mentions of rivals—grist for negative advertising.
There is only one solution: make better products or give better
service.

Of the goods and services discussed here, a major kind is
conspicuously missing so far: entertainment. Some of the best is
free. Just ahead you’ll find a favorite of many Netfolks—the Internet
Underground Music Archive, from which you can download free
samples from top hits as well as surprises from new musicians.

CHAPTER
THREE
EntertaiNet: A Few
Musings on Net. Rock,
Leonardo da Vinci and
Bill Gates, Bianca’s
Smut Shack, and
David Letterman
in Cyberspace
Don’t count on the Ugly Mugs pushing Billy Joel off the charts, or
even showing up at your closest record store.
They’re zany, avant-garde musicians whose work is a cross
between Frank Zappa and freakish, carnival rock—not the stuff of
the Top 40. But Jeff Patterson, a thin, pale guitarist with a fondness
for old jeans and green-topped sneakers, can still spread the word
about himself and the other Mugs. Their music is on the Internet.
Fans as far off as Turkey and Japan can dial the Internet
Underground Music Archive run by Patterson and his “co-czar, ” Rob
Lord. Hundreds of musicians are suddenly in cyberspace. For just
$ 100 a year they can pay IUMA to post cuts from their music,
complete with information on how you can send away for the CDs
and tapes. In fact, some have even posted complete songs to the
Net for free.
Tens of thousands of Netfolk a week dial up IUMA, making
200, 000 page-accesses—perhaps a third of the attention that
Playboy gets, but still one of the best numbers on the Web. That’s

no small feat: The archive more or less started in a tiny room with a
bare lightbulb dangling from the ceiling, and it is still a low-budget
operation run by two information science majors.
IUMA is just one of many delights on the Net for techies and
technophobes alike. Entertainment and culture are taking off in a
major way in cyberspace just when clueless Snubbites are deriding
the Net as artless. I can enjoy gifted but unheralded performers,
from reggae artists to banjo players. The New Zealand Symphony is
online with a digitized rendition of the national anthem down there.
Imagine the possibilities for fans of classical music in the future—the
chances to hear live performances of Tchaikovsky directly from
Moscow, or enjoy classical Chinese music from Peking or Taipei.
Net. radio is already here. WYXC, for example, a station at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, sends rock music into the
ether twenty-four hours a day.
Running software called RealAudio, owners of deluxe home
computers can hear top-ten rap from an Internet site in South
Korea, astrological forecasts from England, and selected programs
from ABC News, National Public Radio, the C-SPAN cable network,
the radio version of the Christian Science Monitor, the National Press
Club, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, and a wealth of other
draws whenever they want—even weeks or months after the original
broadcasts.
Just a mouse click on the right Web address conjures up a Daniel
Schorr commentary, or a feature about the Illinois reporter whom
the mob supposedly buried in concrete, or scads of other NPR
offerings that I wish I could have enjoyed when they first aired. I
don’t have to bother with tricky downloads of files containing the
sound. This happens on its own.
RealAudio sounds rather muffled right now, at least on my
computer, as if the technology is a throwback to 1920s radio. But
sooner or later it will make FM stereo seem antediluvian.
Consider, too, the diversity of programming from grassroots
people who can broadcast at a fraction of the costs of even peanut-
whistle stations. Thousands of mom-and-pop sites—unencumbered
by the Federal Communications Commission, unless the nanny

faction wins out in D. C. and cracks down on the Net—may be online
in the next year or two. What happens when unpopular political
beliefs spread around this way? Will the Oklahoma City tragedy be
invoked to squelch RealAudio and equivalents?
Cheerier possibilities may arise. Someday you might go hiking in
the middle of the Rockies and be able to tune in performances and
talk shows from all over the world through a net. satellite link; never
mind the limits of the local radio stations.
Even video transmission will be routine over the Net or a
successor. And then what? When Michael Moriarty, a TV actor,
appeared in a public Q&A session on Prodigy, the possibilities made
him wonder if network television would go the way of vinyl records.
“Television, ” he told the New York Times, “might become the 33-1/3
of the visual arts. ”
For the moment, however, the Net is Fan Central for television
along with other media. David Letterman fans and those of Jay Leno
debate the merits of their favorite talk show hosts, while major
movie studios preview their megahits with video clips. Elvis is alive
and well in an area on the Web. And just when we Netfolks are
ridiculing the TV moguls’ dream of 500 channels of Terminator
movies, Hollywood has used our Net to ballyhoo Junior—a comedy
starring the Terminator himself, Arnold Schwarzenegger. As if that
isn’t enough, Hollywood has just released The Net, a thriller with
some evil techies; let’s see what the marketers will post on the Web
to push that one. Lower on the show business hierarchy, you can
find model Danielle Ash replying to questions, in alt. sex. breasts,
about her double Fs.
Netfolks with more elevated tastes can dial up the WebMuseum,
Paris, or check out the works of new digital artists from Boston or
New York or dozens of other big cities. Obviously the Net isn’t the
same as beholding a Rembrandt in Holland and gazing into the face
of a local man or woman a few feet away. That’s screamingly clear.
Stoll, the near Snubbite, correctly notes that “Rembrandt painted
real people—their facial features and mannerisms live on today in
the Dutch population. Dressed in period costumes, I’ll bet the
security guard with his war medals and the young woman tour guide

would look as if they stepped out of one of those incredibly detailed
paintings. ” Moving and true. Imagine, however, the benefits of the
WebMuseum to people without the Snubbites’ ability to jet to
Amsterdam or Paris. What’s more, the Web brings its own glories to
compensate; I can view Artist X’s work, then call up text about the
person or the times; if anything the Web can provide more context
than do the skimpy handouts available at most museums.
Caviling away, Stoll also objects that computers can’t reproduce
the art exactly. But colors and resolution will just keep improving.
The Snubbites who rant about lost details remind me of the foes of
electronic books; incorrectly, given the ease of digitizing everything,
the foes worry that new technology could kill off distinctive type -
faces. But we shouldn’t preserve art and literature just by attending
to the detail work. Culture also needs a place in the public mind; da
Vinci-class art should be free, or close to it, by way of the Net. That
is surely the ethos of Nicholas Pioch. An ex-Microsoft intern now
studying economics in his native France, he is behind the
WebMuseum, Paris, the new name it bears, now that bureaucrats
won’t let him say, “Le WebLouvre. ”
Within Le WebLouvre—there, I’ll say it anyway—I saw such da
Vincis as Mona Lisa and Virgin and Child with the Infant John the
Baptist and St. Anne. I went on to look at Rembrandts, van Goghs,
Cezannes, Dalis, Klees, and Manets, among others, and to read two
warnings. “If you think the law prevents you from viewing these
exhibits, you should stop now and do something more interesting,
such as flying to Paris and touring live! ” Pioch wrote. “Some
companies may be trying to get a monopolistic grab on arts and
culture, ” he said elsewhere, “developing a pay-per-view logic,
shipping out CD-ROMs while trying to patent stuff which belongs to
each of us: a part of our human civilization and history. ”
How right Pioch was. Bill Gates has just bought a notebook of
Leonardo da Vinci, and let’s hope that like some of the old robber
barons, Gates will habitually share his acquisitions with the world.
But a major difference shows up here. Andrew Carnegie and the rest
did not make their money off art and entertainment, part of Gates’
master plan. For Bill Gates to give away great paintings and

manuscripts will be like Carnegie giving away steel. His motives may
be the most ethereal, and with a $10-billion net worth, he can afford
many a donation; but a conflict will forever arise between Gates the
businessman and Gates the philanthropist. Just which side will
prevail when he dies? If not in life, then in death, by way of his
lawyers, will he have the decency to turn all his old masters loose on
the Net for free viewing? No judgments here. Perhaps that day will
come. He has already agreed to loan the notebook to a museum.
Old masters, of course, are far from the only Culture on the Net,
and I doubt that Bill Gates will be interested in buying some of the
other kind—especially Bianca’s Smut Shack. Don’t ask me if Bianca
exists. The Shack’s “trolls” swear that she does. If so, maybe a good
many Netfolks know her at least slightly. They can click on a picture
to flit from room to room of her virtual apartment on the Web, leave
notes on the walls of her virtual bathroom, enter her virtual music
room to take in the latest jazz or rock, or engage virtually in sex acts
with strangers in Argentina or Brazil or San Francisco or wherever
else hormones fuel technology.
Bianca’s proud trolls have not sold out their mascot; the virtual
Bianca lives on the Web for fun, not direct money making. But
sooner or later, elsewhere on the Net, if this has not happened
already, an ad agency will create a fictitious character who buys CDs,
foods, books, video tapes, automobiles, and other products only
from hidden “sponsors”—not open, MCI-style ones (as described in
chapter 2). I’ll hope that day is far off. The FCC has had problems
enough regulating children’s TV; imagine what could happen if
supposedly educational areas knuckled under to Madison Avenue.
I’m not sure if laws are the solution here, but it would behoove Net
providers to come up now with rules against that sort of thing.
In the fun areas of the Net, other dangers lurk for the vulnerable.
Millions of Netfolks enjoy role-playing in imaginary worlds known as
Multi-User Dungeons, where they can be knights or damsels,
regardless of gender—sometimes men assume women’s roles to win
more attention. At the risk of sounding like Stoll and the Snubbites, I
have mixed feelings about the worth of MUD-style diversions.

A real potential exists for cocaine-heavy addiction—far more than
just regular Netsurfing, where you’re not competing to rescue a fair
maiden or dodge alien attacks. Stories circulate of role-players who
have kissed off good grades and careers. Up in Canada, one player
got so wrapped up in his game that my researcher found him amid
wall-to-wall trash as he struggled to balance his schoolwork and
role-playing.
Just like online groups for depressed people, however, MUDs and
similar areas can bring shy Netfolks together face to face. I heard of
several romances, in fact, that the games led to. Risks
notwithstanding, games do more good than harm if players just
know when to quit. Like it or not, among millions of Netfolks, MUDs
and cousins are as much a part of the Internet as the Web and @
signs.
Of all the entertainment on the Net, however, the musical and
video kinds could most intrigue the masses as the technology takes
off; with just a modem, a reasonably powerful computer, and a $100
sound card, you can hear the offerings of IUMA and similar areas.
You don’t even need programs such as Mosaic or Netscape if you
know what you’re doing. People with cheapie dial-up connections
and no frills software can download rock albums and the rest.
Granted, the technology as a whole could be better, and even using
IUMA can tax the wallets and patience of some. In most cases you’ll
spend more time downloading the music—from a remote machine to
your own—than you will hearing it. Fidelity on some setups may be
just this side of a tin can. But that’s now. Wait.
Transmissions in the future will zip along through cable TV
connections to the Internet, or through ISDN[3.1] phone connections.
Then you’ll truly be able to use the Net as a jukebox and hear what
you click on with your mouse. What’s more, even now, with the right
software, you can enjoy almost CD-ROM-quality fidelity from areas
such as IUMA. Audio was the next step up after text, of course, and,
yes, video is on the way. Techies already have mounted gigabyte
after gigabyte of amateur videos on the Net. Sooner or later,
directors of little films will enjoy a monster-sized IUMA-style archive.

Perhaps Rob Lord and Jeff Patterson, those co-czars of IUMA, will
run it, too.
If you think that the $10-billion-a-year recording industry is a little
nervous, you’re right. In early 1994 Lord told the San Jose Mercury
News: “We want to kill the record companies.” He and Patterson
have backed off since then; they’ve even helped Warner and other
giants set up Net areas of their own. IUMA’s own 500-act selection is
pathetic compared to those at the largest record stores. Still, think
about the long run: The IUMA model just might jeopardize the
seven-digit salaries of top recording executives. After all, if the Net
can advertise music and even be used to take orders—perhaps with
electronic forms—just what becomes of the big studios? They
themselves will sell music directly over the Net, but with heavy
competition.
The bypass-the-middle-man idea could apply in other ways. What
about radio hosts, for example? Suppose they can reach people all
over the world through the Internet, and perhaps ultimately through
wireless connections based on the Net. Will they need CBS or NBC or
ABC or equivalents as much as they do now? I can already download
snippets from, say, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Too, just
what will be the fate of art dealers if so much of art goes digital and
people can discover artists on their own without leaving their living
rooms? Publishers of newspapers, magazines, and books, of course,
are in a quandary—see the next chapter on electronic publishing.
In some ways I don’t envy the big guys. IUMA is clearly wired into
the Internet, while companies such as CBS, at least at this point, are
fumbling in some respects. Many of the amateurs on the Net are
actually coming up with better offerings than are the professionals.
When I dropped by, the official Letterman page on the WWW was
far from an abomination, and yet at the same time it showed the
problems here.
The page indeed was full of odds and ends about how to get Late
Show tickets, Letterman’s upcoming guests, his top-ten lists (the one
for the April 13th broadcast was on “Ways CBS Can Raise Money,”
with number one being “A two-hour paycheck freeze on Letterman”),
and the rest. But where were the connections with the rest of the

Net, especially the many Letterman fans out there? How about the
fans’ Letterman pages? Or relevant mailing lists or newsgroups?
Perhaps they were there but hidden, but whatever the case the
cyberspace Letterman was less hip than the one on The Box.
To Letterman’s credit, he didn’t fake things. He publicly confessed
he was ignorant of data ways. But in my opinion, his Web people
could have done better.
Moving on to the CBS home page, I saw an offer for me to “Join
the EYE ON THE NET club. That way we can send you more
information about CBS and its programs. You can also take part in
special previews and other interactive events. Fill out the following
registration form and we’ll give you a special CBS screen saver just
for joining.” Oh, boy, that was just why I was on the Internet—to
end up on marketers’ lists. I didn’t blame CBS for trying; some of
Letterman’s fans would like the free software. But surely the network
could have done better.
Aaron Barnhart, who put out a good little electronic fan newsletter
called Late Show News, defended Dave’s people on the Net. “I think
it’s great,” he said of the official Letterman area. “All of these large
entities are trying their best to integrate with the interactive age. A
lot of e-mail gets passed that you never see, so don’t assume that
just because there aren’t any bulletin boards... there is no
interaction happening.”
Perhaps he was being kind to his sources for his newsletter—I
hadn’t any idea. What was clear was that he’d made a second career
of Lettermandom. He devoted twenty to thirty hours a week to
Letterman-related activities. Much of his newsletter was a review of
reviews (“Frank Rich of the New York Times wrote one of his
standard pitiless columns last week on the Oscars broadcast, and we
quote, ‘in which the belly-flopping David Letterman demonstrated
just how large a bullet he dodged by not moving his own show to
L. A.’”). Barnhart also served as owner of the Top 10 List (“60,000
subscribers and booming”).
So what was Barnhart in it for? He was freelancing for the Village
Voice, and I could see where some attention might do any writer’s
career good, but if Barnhart even wanted to be on The Late Show

itself, he did a pretty good job of concealing that. “Attention is
great,” he said, “but it doesn’t pay the rent.” Did he send stuff into
the show? “No.” So why was Letterman so popular on the Net?
“Demographics.” Well-off computer owners just liked that kind of
program.
I checked out the Letterman page maintained by Jason A.
Lindquist, an electronic engineering student at the University of
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, a self-described “Statistician, Smart-Ass-
for-Hire, and Mac Programmer.” I found references to newsgroup
postings on such items as “Dave instigates the feud with Bryant
Gumbel with these words,” “The great Stevie Nicks controversy of
1986,” “Madonna—Your first choice to date your son,” and “No inside
stuff on the strong guy or the fat guy here.” And I saw mentions of
the newsletter, the Frequently Asked Questions List, and at least two
Letterman-related newsgroups. CBS ought to hire this guy.
It was time to move on to alt. fans. letterman. I did a search within
Netscape for the word “Leno” in the subject header and found a post
from an apparent Leno fan on the attack: “Everyone knows that Jay
Leno is way better than ugly gap-tooth Dave!”
“Oh,” replied one of the faithful, “you say that Jay Leno is still on
the air? Is it true that they use a wide-angle lens to photograph that
lantern jaw of his? Just wondering.”
“Letterman has more comedy in his little pinkie toe than Leno will
have in his wildest dreams,” said another Davite, “and if Letterman is
so ugly, who has all the models and top actresses flirting with him
and asking him to go out—it certainly isn’t Leno.”
That, not the official Letterman area, was the true Net. Just what
might await the world if the inmates actually ran the asylum and
themselves mounted a major entertainment effort rather than
trusting the corporate world. It had happened with the Internet
Underground Music Archives, and I liked the results.
IUMA

The normal story is that IUMA began when Rob Lord and Jeff
Patterson, the co-czars, met in a newsgroup devoted to
supermodels. Both liked Kate Moss, a waify Calvin Klein woman;
strutting down the runways, she was lost amid the big, bosomy
knockouts favored by so many young men on the Net. It turned out
that Lord and Patterson were both from Valencia, California, a far-
north suburb of Los Angeles. They knew each other slightly from
William Hart High School, both had worked in record stores while
teenagers, and both had both been attending the University of
California at Santa Cruz. That’s the story, and it’s true.
IUMA, however, in another way, may have started not on the Net
but in the corporeal United Kingdom.
Thousand and thousands of Brits were dancing to synthesized
bleeps, conks, cooonkks, clunks, bomb-bombs and tssss-tsss-tssses,
and odds and ends that I could never even come close to
reproducing here. The name of the music was Rave, as in “raving
mad,” and by the time Lord was in high school in the 1980s, the
craze had found its way to Los Angeles.
Middle-class white suburbanites, Latinos, Blacks, they were all
bleeping and conking together, thousands of them, risking the wrath
of the fire department, overcrowding the halls, going at it from 11
P. M. on, some dancing twelve hours on into the morning.
“No place in Los Angeles,” Lord said of the Rave halls, “had such a
peaceful coexistence as between these three groups. They didn’t say
anything. They shared the beats and feelings and the technology.
And on the Rave scene, the person in charge is the DJ, and they’re
sort of the cultural funnel. The DJs were in charge of finding these
odd records that would come from Belgium and from the UK and
from Chicago, and there were some made-in-Los Angeles things.
They were hard to find, but the DJs were responsible for scouting
them out and bringing the very latest bleeps and conks together.”
“So,” I asked, thinking of IUMA and Lord’s chance to bring the
world to his listeners, “you liken yourself to those DJs?”
“Yeah, yeah!” Lord said enthusiastically. “I believe IUMA is my
personal implementation of Rave’s calling. I just love working with
technology and all those kinds of things, and what Rave culture

espoused was that there’s a new revolution going on, an information
revolution. You know, one of the biggest stars of Rave music was a
band called Dee-Lite. And one of the first lines was, ‘From New York
City in the age of communication.’ And that means all kinds of
communications, a shrinking world, Internet, it means ideas and the
convergence of ideas.”
Returning to the subject of his younger days, Rob Lord told me
how much he hated the Depeche Mode music that was so popular in
upper-middle-class neighborhoods like his—the kind the record
stores were selling. He wanted his music from the clubs, from the
100-copy pressing, not from the megaconglomerates offering the
likes of Depeche. “The lyrics were terrible, and the emotions were
feigned.” I’m sure Depeche fans might disagree. The point, however,
was that Depeche music was much more readily available at record
stores than Rave was, and Rob grew unhappy with the distribution
system.
Jeff Patterson, working at a music store, just like Rob Lord, was
equally disgusted. Patterson and co-workers “would sit there and
talk about who’s making all the money.” CDs cost $15-$17 at Music
Plus, his employer. Elsewhere they were around $12-$13. “And you
know, we were thinking like, ‘Where is that extra $4 being
pocketed?’ You know, after all the costs were taken out, then their
manager would get paid, the record company would get paid, people
on the tour would get paid, and then the band would finally get
some money after all that, and it was usually a very small check. So
the artists that were actually continuing to be artists were the artists
that were making money; so it was, like, this level of superstardom
that was consistent and the barriers of entry were extremely high.”
That was true in all kinds of creative endeavors, especially in
writing. I myself was amused when lobbyists representing industries
such as music and publishing would rant on and on about the need
for “creative incentives.” If business people at the
megaconglomerates really understood incentives, they would cut out
their caviar, sell off the executive jets, and spend more than a
modicum on garden-variety artists—not just the Mailers and
Madonnas. When, even as a teenager, Jeff Patterson started asking

where the money was going, he was laying some of the more
important underpinnings for IUMA.
An “A” student who would later graduate near the top of his class,
Patterson wrote a school paper on another major issue: censorship.
Back in the 1980s, Tipper Gore, Al’s wife, had helped start a group
called the Parents Music Resource Center, which wanted to rate
music and keep the more nefarious offerings out of the hands and
CD players of young people. “I was a big fan of Frank Zappa and he
was basically taking it upon himself to challenge the PMRC.” The
Senate held hearings. And Patterson recalled that PMRC deemed a
Zappa recording, “Jazz from Hell,” to be sinful. The album lacked
lyrics and the cover just showed Zappa’s face. “It was obvious,”
Patterson said of Tipper’s group, “that they weren’t actually listening
to the content or caring what it was. They just kind of labeled some
artists as being bad, and therefore were trying to prevent stores
from selling many albums.” I asked if that made Patterson think later
on, “Let’s go on the Net so we don’t have those bozos to worry
about.” “Yeah, yeah. That actually had a big part in it.”
From the start, it was clear that Patterson’s own music wouldn’t
exactly please the conventional. In high school he played guitar in
speed metal bands, which are “usually a lot faster, a lot more angry
sounding” than heavy metal. When the Ugly Mugs found each other
at William Hart High, Patterson rejoiced in his friends’ weirdness.
The style in this case was Dada, a form of random art.
“Who cared if anyone liked listening to it,” Patterson said. “We just
wanted to play it. We were using mainly guitar and keyboards and
bass. However, we wouldn’t always play them in the normal
standard ways. Like, we’d use guitar for percussion or something,
and we had also used a vacuum cleaner and things like that. A lot of
times we just recorded sounds of things that were just laying
around.” Their big gig was at an interpretative dancing class at a
community college where teacher and students loved Dada-style
mime.
The Ugly Mugs was a life, not just a band. Except for an Egyptian
guitarist, whose hair stubbornly kept turning into an Afro when he
let it grow, all the Mugs sported long locks. In a dark, ratty, poster-

ridden room, they would talk politics and philosophy, standard
teenage fashion.
Lord ended up at the University of California at Santa Cruz, and
Patterson himself went on to the University of California at Berkeley,
where he studied computers, his fallback field. He had made music
on them in high school, and, in fact, at Berkeley. “I started changing
my major to be a combination of music and computers. Two years
into it I really got frustrated with the high pressure and decided to
transfer to U. C. Santa Cruz. It’s right on the beach, a laid-back
community. Everyone drives, like, five miles under the speed limit.”
Beyond that, members of the Ugly Mugs had moved there, and in
Patterson’s opinion, the school itself was “really great.”
David Huffman taught there. In a certain niche of computerdom,
Huffman was famous as the creator of Huffman coding, a
compression routine that software products such as Stacker use to
double the space available on hard drives. Music isn’t exactly a low-
bandwidth use of the Net. Compression routines of one kind or
another are de rigueur for the transmission of high-quality sound—
not just because of the space that the material requires, but also
because big files take longer to transmit.
At the time Patterson moved to Santa Cruz, he wasn’t using
Hoffman compression on the Net or posting CD-quality sound from
hundreds of musicians through an IUMA-style operation. But like
other techies, he was posting files in the synthesized MIDI format.
“The stuff I put up there, it sounded like a bad Casio keyboard
playing our songs. It really wasn’t very representative at all. I’d just
sit there at my computer, compose ’em on the computer, and upload
’em on the Net. I posted them to a couple of news groups, like
alt. binaries. sound and things like that and basically got no response
at all.”
Jeff Patterson was reading the supermodel newsgroup when he
saw a posting from Rob Lord in favor of Kate Moss, the model that
so many of the regulars considered too bony. Patterson replied. “We
were both huge Kate Moss fans.” Lord sent him some e-mail talking
about how Kate Moss should be the “queen of supermodels.” People
on the Net have a custom of leaving “signatures” at the bottom of

messages—places where they may post their address or phone
number, or an I-don’t-speak-for-IBM disclaimer, or quote somebody
to support them or deride them—and Patterson took quick notice of
Lord’s “. sig.” It alluded to “MPEG Audio Compression, 16 to 1 CD
Quality.”
“And,” Patterson recalled, “I was like, ‘Wow, what’s that?’ So I e-
mailed him back talking about getting together some Moss pictures,
and in passing I asked him about MPEG compression.” MPEG stood
for Motion Picture Expert Group—engineers who set standards for
audio and video compression. Growing curious, Patterson
downloaded software so he could play MPEG through his sound
card. The results delighted him, and he spread the news to the other
Ugly Mugs. Hey, guys, Patterson said in effect, what if we put our
music on the Internet? “They thought it was a pretty good idea. So
we decided to chip in together and go ahead and buy the software
that we needed to compress MPEG files, because you could get that
player for free, but the compressor cost $100. Rob came over to my
house, and I told him we were putting our band on the Net, and he
was all excited about the whole idea of creating this archive of bands
on the Net.“ But of course! Rave-think could reach cyberspace.
Something was evident here, something obvious to me, but
perhaps not to all the bluenoses and prudish, power-fixated
bureaucrats. Patterson and Lord were proving the old wisdom that
hormones could drive technology on the Net, or at least the applied
variety.
The wizardry of MPEG would be useless if people didn’t use it. And
it took a meeting of Patterson and Lord in the supermodel group—
not one devoted to Bible study, or to paeans to Bill Clinton or Al
Gore, or to the mandarins of Singapore—for IUMA to give MPEG one
of its biggest boosts on the Net. Why, horror of horrors, Patterson
and Lord just may have wanted to scan and swap copyrighted
photos of Kate Moss. One way or another MPEG would become
important on the Net, but thanks to people like these two, it was
happening far faster than it would have otherwise. Technology was
at odds with the vested interests of record companies, and they
knew it.

At around the same time IUMA was getting under way in fall 1993,
lobbyists for the companies and performing artists were fighting for
laws that could lead to onerous pay-per-listen schemes—while
publishers were trying to lay the basis for pay-per-read. Indeed,
business people and creators should receive fair compensation,
especially the creators; but in the zeal to protect major political
contributors from the entertainment industry, bureaucrats and
lawyers could imperil technology in the most lethal of ways. Bruce
Lehman, Bill Clinton’s intellectual property czar, would prove it later
with a stunningly oppressive proposal called the Green Paper, a
technophobic lawyer’s wetdream, a techie’s nightmare.
The first song the Ugly Mugs put on the Net was called ”Arbeit
Macht Frei”—German for “Work will make you free.” A punky carnival
song, it sparked an instant debate on free speech.
Asked about the title, Patterson told me, “It was kind of born out
of our frustration of, ‘In order to have the money to do everything
that we want to do, we have to work, but if we work, we can’t do
anything we want to do.’ So it was kind of like commenting on
people’s attitude of, ‘If you work you’ll be able to do what you want
to do,’ when actually you won’t be able to do what you want to,
because you’ll be working. Actually it wasn’t a smart song title. It
was a phrase that was over the gate on the way to the Auschwitz
concentration camp in Poland. Unfortunately, people took it to be
this Nazi song, which is actually completely the opposite of what we
meant.
“We got responses from people who flamed me because they
thought it was extremely cruel to be using this as a name for a song
and taking it all lighthearted when it actually meant something
serious to a lot of people. Whenever anyone actually wrote to me, I
usually sent them back the lyrics and explained our stance, why it
was called that. It definitely created enough of a stir among the few
people who heard it. You wonder if a label would ever take a chance
with something like that.”
On the Net, however, “Arbeit Macht Frei” would find its audience.
A man from Turkey asked for a full demo tape—unavailable—and
more songs. Other Netfolks wrote in from Texas, Florida, and

elsewhere in the States, some of whom said more or less: “You
know, wow, I’m a Zappa fan and I can hear the influence. It’s pretty
cool.” The Net, in character, was blurring distinctions between artists
and fans and helping the two groups mix. “We realized we had
something,” Patterson told me. “Like, ‘Jeez, we got these responses
to a band that had never played anywhere and didn’t have a tape
out.’ So we started grabbing a couple of our friends’ bands—like my
roommate’s. And we put Rob’s roommate’s band up there, and we
just kind of kept grabbing bands to put up. And slowly everyone was
getting one or two responses to what they had posted. And we
needed a place to actually keep all this music. There were like four
bands maybe at that time.”
Patterson, however, quickly filled up all the disk space available to
him at his commercial Internet provider, Netcom; so he and Lord
contacted their university and asked if they could store the music
there. “Well, it turned out that the guy who was in charge of running
the FTP site was a musician—he was in four bands—and he said,
‘Sure, go for it.’ And we put his four bands up there.”
The technology would have seemed infuriatingly hard to the world
at large. You couldn’t just hook into the World Wide Web, point and
click your way to the IUMA archives, and choose the song you
wanted; no, you had to do FTP, short for File Transfer Protocol,
threading your way through the big hard drives at Santa Cruz, until
you reached the subdirectory with the music. And then, with most
software, you had to type out the file names. Patterson and Lord
didn’t even start out with postings on Gopher (which, to be grossly
simplistic, is a more primitive version of the Web).
Even back then, however, the two were thinking about the Net
equivalent of album covers or of the J cards that record companies
used to tout cassettes. In other words they didn’t just post files of
sound alone. They also pondered the use of files with pictures that
music fans could download.
“At this point,” Patterson said, “it was still just a fun project. We
didn’t think about making it a money-making venture at that point.
We were just like, you know, ‘Let’s put bands up and see what we
can do to mess with the record industry.’ We had this attitude like,

‘We’ll cut out waste in the industry.’ At that time there was, like, no
press about us, so we weren’t really vocal, but we had those
attitudes. We were kind of like naive and rebellious.”
Then an event happened that was almost as significant to IUMA
as was the discovery of MPEG. Lord discovered the World Wide Web.
“None of us,” Patterson recalled, “had any clue what it was. I think it
was in December of ’93 that we got a hold of a copy of Mosaic.”
They tried it out in a faculty lounge at U. C. Santa Cruz. “There
wasn’t really much content on the Web at all. It was pretty much,
like, weather satellites. We realized from that point on that we could
really do something with taking the music and the pictures and using
the World Wide Web as the way to present everything. People would
be able to look at the album cover, read the text, see ‘play’ buttons.
You know, press the play button, hear the music, and all that sort of
thing.
“So,” Patterson said, “we called up the guy we knew from
maintaining the FTP archives at U. C. Santa Cruz, and asked him
what he knew about the World Wide Web.” Overnight he learned
how to set IUMA up on the Web. His name was Jon Luini, and he
would become a partner in IUMA, the co-czars’ “Kaiser.”
Meanwhile IUMA’s popularity kept growing, and soon the archives
landed on SunSite UNC, a big digital library sponsored by Sun Micro
Systems at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. IUMA
would even make it to servers in Europe, so that people there could
enjoy the music without tying up the trans-Atlantic connections.
Other big companies, such as Silicon Graphics, took an interest in
IUMA and donated computers and other gear.
But how were Patterson and Lord—and their musicians—going to
make money off the Internet, where “free” was a religion and where
commercial audio might be pirated? I loved the many legitimately
free pleasures of the Net. It was truly for sharing. IUMA, of course,
was offering lots of music at no charge. Via the World Wide Web, I
myself was giving away a book chapter I’d written for a forthcoming
information science collection; and I hoped that at least some
material from NetWorld! would be retrievable without any money
changing hands. But what to do about the darker side of “free?”

Sympathetic to the cash-short but clearly a realist, Lord told how
casually kids copied computer games for each other. “There’s a
complete underground going on,” he said, and he told how young
hackers had secretly turned the IUMA archives into a site for stolen
software. The mischief was hard to spot just by doing the usual
check of the storage area.
“We deleted their stuff,” Lord recalled, “and left a note saying,
‘Leave us alone, you Rug Rats,’ because it was clear there were 13-
year-olds doing it. Some of the biggest pirates in the world are
younger than 15.”
His words rang true. Adolescents in the States were no match for
the best pros abroad, but the teenaged pirates could still be
awesomely well organized. One group of teens might crack the
software. Another group might craft a slick screen telling who had
defeated the protection. Lord told of a 13-year-old making $24,000 a
year writing and selling shareware; and although the business was
legitimate, this example showed the energy and brains out there
among the young—in other words, the difficulty of fighting rip-offs.
Lord and Patterson were thinking about releasing IUMA offerings
with digital identifiers that would make it easier to track down
thieves. And yet another tack could be to design the music files that
you could play only with the right digital keys. IUMA’s owners were
of GenNet; they were more interested in relying on technology than
law to thwart pirates.
Piracy is one reason why major record companies feel uneasy
about the Internet. Unable to ignore so large a market, they want
help in getting their message across to the strange, young denizens.
Warner paid IUMA to put short samples of music online, along with
pictures and information about the artists. It was similar to what
Patterson and Lord were doing already.
Now, however, like many others, the two were looking ahead to
new business models. Lord had a bunch of possibilities in mind.
One was that people would pay if they liked what they heard, and
maybe even give in advance. Another was that they would receive
little gifts——maybe clay cats?——for making donations.

Patterson, however, offered some models that were more
conventional. Gasp, his comments even sounded like an actual
business plan.
First, he said, he and Lord would take orders for CDs and tapes
online for companies such as Tower Records. Then IUMA would go
the next step. It would sell files of music electronically. Fans would
be able to use Web browsers like Netscape to encrypt credit card
numbers so hackers couldn’t intercept them. Eventually IUMA would
sell music for instant listening without customers first having to
transfer it to their hard disks. “There could be some kind of royalty
treatment,” Patterson said. “You might pay two cents every time you
listened to a song. Or you could just buy an album.” Some good
possibilities existed here as long as no one gouged. If people could
hear music with just a tiny investment up front, that might benefit
new performers.
More immediately, IUMA was helping fledgling musicians and
others by way of an informal support network. Sue Few, a Santa
Cruz woman who’d formerly worked for record companies, went
online with a newsletter called Sound Check and offered a stream of
tips on subjects such as copyright law, musicians’ unions, royalties,
and lining up bookings. “Booking people aren’t so bad, are they?”
she wrote. “If they enjoy your tape and feel you’ll fit well with their
customers, you’ll get booked—simple as that. So they don’t return
your telephone calls—keep calling until you talk to a live person and
still keep calling until you get an answer and a date from them.”
IUMA itself was a calling card of sorts. Record companies and
clubs could cruise the archives looking for bands to sign up.
Most important of all, however, IUMA helped potential fans and
musicians get together. At the time I toured the IUMA area you
could check out offerings by “Last 15 Bands” just uploaded to the
archives, by artist, by label, by location, and by song title. Or you
could click on a database with a number of options. I myself wanted
to know more about Scott Brookman, who had written “When I Die
You Can’t Have My Organs,” and who, as a result of IUMA, had been
on National Public Radio.

A digitized photo showed him to be a bearded man with glasses.
Something white was against his face, though I couldn’t quite
discern the shape. I hoped it wasn’t a stray from an anatomy lab.
Messages on the screen said IUMA would let Netfolks listen to
Brookman’s “Organs” in stereo or mono. I clicked on the latter
option and watched the bottom of my screen as it showed the
number of bytes passing over the wires from a computer in
California to my 486DX-class machine. Within 45 seconds I’d
received a 119K file. In size it was equivalent to maybe 60 double-
spaced, typewritten pages even though this was music not text.
“When I die,” the lyrics wafted out of my stereo hooked to the
486, “you can’t have my organs, though you think that you will need
them...” If I’d had the right software on my machine, I could have
heard several minutes’ worth. The song was good even if, with my
primitive sound software, it wasn’t even AM in audio quality. My
rather untrained ears picked up a Loudon Wainwright-ish edge to the
music. I made a mental note to myself. When I was off my book
deadline, I’d do what I should have done in the first place and install
the MPEG software whose existence had helped make IUMA
possible. I had heard only a little cut in another format With MPEG I
could have enjoyed three minutes’ worth, and in better fidelity.
In the IUMA area Brookman said, “Organs” was “from my latest
cassette release, ‘They’ll Nickel and Dime You to Death.’” He thought
of his music “as a bizarre mix of stylistic parody, satire, self-
referential, and meta-songs, full of clever guitar riffs and daring
vocal harmonies. I write about personal heroes, local history,
teenage memories, bits of folklore, and sometimes I make fun of
rock music (lovingly, of course). Usually the result is intentionally
funny...”
Brookman’s inevitable pitch for money was reasonable enough. “I
hope you enjoy the song, and I really think you should get yourself a
copy of ‘They’ll Nickel and Dime You to Death.’ Send a check for five
bucks (no charge cards) made payable to Loser Records. That’s a full
60 minutes of awesome music for only $5. Where else, other than a
used record store, can you find that kind of entertainment bargain?
Here’s our address: Loser Records, P. O. Box 14719, Richmond,

Virginia 23221.” Hey, I’d already enjoyed a bargain, his delightful
little fan area. I would remember the name Brookman.
People could leave feedback and I brought up some. “My
colleagues and I agree—what a scream!!” read a note from Virginia,
where Brookman lived. “I think we’re going to track down your CD.
Congrats on a nifty tune! It’s good to hear a local band ‘make it
big.’” An Australian wrote in: “Heheheheh. Nice sense of humour.”
None other than Jon Luini, Raiser of IUMA, said of “Organs”: “I
cannot get this song out of my head! The sincerity around this song
is a great combination with the odd nature of the lyrics, especially
when combined with the folk feel of the music. It makes me feel like
it should be included whenever people first get their driver’s license.”
Brookman’s electronic mail address was online, of course, together
with those of listeners who had offered feedback. Anyone wanting to
start a fan list focused on him would already have some names and
e-mail addresses handy.
This was what the Net was so good for—not displaying
Canteresque spam on behalf of Green Cards or pitches from CBS to
join its fan club.
Small business actually enjoyed an advantage here. To CBS, fan
mail must have been a nice a way of gauging the market. But the
Brookmans of this world could go far beyond that and establish good
rapport with fans, one by one—something for which the people at
the CBS site would never have had time, given its volume. Small
worked in other ways for Brookman. He or Loser Records (were they
the same?) could do a short run of CDs and spread the news with
minimum investment. Pressing a thousand CDs costs less than
$2,000 nowadays. Combine that with the Net, and the music world
just might be a little kinder to a young performer than it was in the
days when Lord and Patterson were toiling away in the record stores
back in Valencia.
Granted, a place in the IUMA archives was hardly a guarantee of
success. A musician with the band Black Watch told me that she and
her colleagues normally heard only from a fan or so a week. IUMA
would not make a band instantly rich. On the other hand, she loved
the feedback and encouragement that arrived from all over the

world; and, we both thought, wasn’t that important, too—not just
the money? The music was finding its way to those who loved it.
Besides, in the end, all the small fry might add up. Lord said that
instead of one Madonna there might be fifty—“Maybe it will no
longer make sense to have even one.”[3.2] Perhaps, I hoped, the
money instead would reach the Black Watches.
Once Lord had predicted that in several years IUMA might be “a
one- or two-digit percentage of the $9 billion music industry.”[3.3] I
didn’t know what would happen. Major record companies would
surely be doing plenty on their own. And when I talked to Lord in
April 1995, IUMA’s annual revenues were still in the low six figures.
But that could change, quickly. No matter what happened, IUMA was
brilliant for a niched world in which millions were rebelling against
the any-color-if-it’s-black mindset.
We want just the right friends and spouse; the right home; the
right coffee; the right newsgroups, now that they existed for all;
and, yes, just the right music.
The same nichization is happening in the world of publishing—the
Internet is home to hundreds if not thousands of electronic
publications. So what’s a hometown paper to do? Just how is Time
magazine responding? And in such strange times—normal times,
actually, once they’ve been around long enough—what becomes of
books, especially when you consider the digital piracy issue. In the
next chapter I’ll lay out the problems and even suggest a few
solutions.

CHAPTER
FOUR
Pulped Wood versus
Electrons: Can the
Print World Learn to
Love the Net?
I ran across A. C. Snow on the Internet the other day, and old
memories poured forth.[4.1] A. C. is as low tech as they come. He
writes a Tar Heelish column with jokes and stories about church
picnics and football and beach trips, and yet there he was online
with the folksy prose that I remembered from eons ago. The Raleigh
Times is gone now. A. C. works instead for the bigger News &
Observer, a sister newspaper that thudded against my dormitory
door when I was in college. Weekday circulation is around 150,000
nowadays, and many state legislators wake up each morning to the
N&O—it just might be the most powerful paper in North Carolina.
Millions of people on the Net, however, would question the need
for the three-story tan brick building, the fleet of delivery trucks, and
the recent decision to invest $36 million in color presses.
You can’t update the ink on pulped trees the way you can move
around dots on a computer screen. “Aren’t newspapers obsolete?”
scads of techies are asking. Besides, the Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill
area has changed. Thousands of locals swap e-mail addresses at
cocktail parties, while many schoolchildren grow up reading off
computer screens as well as from books. IBM and other Fortune 500
companies are in Research Triangle Park outside town.

Still, like the Raleigh area, the N&O has evolved. In a nearby
building, a small crew is putting out electronic newspapers on the
Internet and on a bulletin board system. This isn’t just a pulp-and-
ink-era newspaper company. It’s also an Internet provider. Aided by
two phone companies, the N&O gives out free Internet service to
teachers and students to find out what the latter would like online in
the future. It’s offered Netfolks a colorful, multimedia tour of the
state. Tens of thousands drop by the N&O area each week. “The
Internet is like the real world—unorganized, unruly, and filled with
more happenings than any one person can possibly track,” says
Frank Daniels III, the paper’s executive editor. “It’s growing at a
fantastic speed, and its citizens are literate. An opportunity for
editors!”[4.2]
Not everyone on the print side feels as he does. When a
Washington Post writer did a gossipy little item on Cliff Stoll’s
net. exposé, the journalist said book editors were looking forward to
reviewing Silicon Snake Oil as “confirmation of what they hoped was
true all along.”[4.3] That may or may not have been a joke. Whatever
the case, a war is going on between pulped wood and electrons. Can
commercial publications, from newspapers to book publishers, learn
to love the Internet, and what does this mean to us readers?
“There is no doubt in my mind that the Net will force a
transformation of newspapers,” says Peter Lewis, a cyberspace
writer for the New York Times, “but demise? That’s what they said
about radio and television as well.”[4.4] Just the same, a headline in
Wired magazine said online newspapers “still suck.” Many
newspapers are too enamored with the traditional models where
editors and writers inflict whatever they want on the unsuspecting
public. They don’t give their readers enough of a chance to speak
back online or communicate with each other. Still, the best electronic
publications can indeed be two way. And more and more of them
will be packaged for the medium. You’ll be able to read summaries
of stories, for example, and then summon up longer versions with a
click of the mouse.
Even ads may improve. “Think of the typical print tire ad,” says
Teresa Martin, an online expert with the Knight-Ridder newspaper

chain. “Yawn. But what if touching each tire bought up detailed
specs about it, or the sizes in which the store currently has it in
stock—or even some really cool car careening around a racetrack
with the voice-over ‘speed rated?’ The ad can be like a window to a
store, enticing the reader in to look for information.”
I know—computers are too hard for many technophobes to learn,
too big to use in bed, and often too blurry or flickery to read off of;
and batteries are forever eager for their next charge. But life will get
better. It will happen faster if governments worry less about
smartening up TV sets and more about smartening up schoolchildren
with programs that drive down the cost of book-friendly computers.
Much, however, is already going on. Xerox, for example, has
experimented with a computer screen whose output is as sharp as
printing on paper. It’s a power hog, but less hungry screens are
coming. Writing in Digital Media, Martin says the right hardware
could be a mere six years away.[4.5] I myself think—based on my
monitoring of technical publications—that her estimate is
conservative.
Besides, even now, electronic texts can at least complement the
paper kind. For example, they can increase the variety of
newspapers, books, and magazines available. After U. S. Senator
Jesse Helms joked that Bill Clinton would need a bodyguard to
protect him from angry service people who resented his military
policies, I did not rely just on the Washington Post for details. I
called up the story directly from the News&Observer hundreds of
miles away. What’s more, it’s easy to wander from one electronic
publication to others when you are after facts on the same topic, or
to search back issues of newspapers and magazines. Even novelists
are discovering the possibilities of the new media. Readers can
choose their own endings or pass on suggestions to the authors of
works in progress.
Adventurous media people are trying to adapt to this online world
as gracefully as they can, and the Internet is oh so enticing to many.
The cost of the technology has fallen to the point where a bare-
bones newspaper can go on the World Wide Web by investing as
little as $5,000-$10,000 up front. Publishers needn’t divvy up

revenue with a commercial online service, such as America Online or
CompuServe.
Compared to pulped wood, the Net looks better and better—the
price of paper shot up some 30 percent between the fall of 1994 and
the spring of 1995. Environmental regulators are forcing the pulp
mills to quit sullying the air and the water, and new mills can cost
half a billion dollars each to build. “Like the rest of us, ” writes
Jonathan Seybold, publisher of Digital Media, “the paper company
executives read all of the press stuff about the Information Highway,
the rise of online services, and the decline of paper-based
publishing. ” And he says they are now asking, “Why should we
invest in a new paper mill? ” The result? Newsprint shortages and
[ 4. 6 ] higher prices. “The fear, ” Seybold says, “creates its own reality. ”
More than 100 newspapers either are on the Internet or are
planning to be there. The New York Times, for example, has used
the World Wide Web to transmit a fax edition condensed from the
normal paper. A full-grown Times may be on the Net now. The San
Jose Mercury News in California not only is online, it offers a service
called News Hound. For just $ 10 a month, the Hound will
automatically scan a massive database from Knight-Ridder papers
and additional dailies, then e-mail you the latest articles on the cover
girls of Sports Illustrated, on Afghanistan, on the Chicago Bears, on
Bill Clinton, or on any other topic that quickens your pulse or makes
you reach for your Valium. From the Halifax Daily News to Poland’s
Gazeta Wyborcza, newspapers are trying the Net. Even a strike
paper, published by reporters of the San Francisco Examiner and
Chronicle, made it into cyberspace.
Some Netfolks preferred the strike daily to the electronic spin-offs
of the regular ones, and I wasn’t surprised. What applies to business
applies to newspapers: The Net is a great equalizer in some ways; a
small newspaper can reach as far-flung a readership as an
international daily. In fact, the first paper on the World Wide Web
just might have been the Palo Alto Weekly from Silicon Valley. South
Africa’s Mail&Guardian, a 30, 000-circulation weekly, finds the
Internet a much cheaper way to reach people overseas than air -
mail. Devoted to Russian news, the St. Petersburg Press uses the

Internet to serve an English-speaking audience throughout the
world. The London Telegraph has shown up on the Net with some
striking graphics. No longer is the Internet just for little magazines
published by techies and smart young English majors.
Time Warner has put Time, People, Entertainment Weekly, and a
shelf full of other magazines in a colorful, well-done area of the
World Wide Web. Readers can praise and flame the editors and each
other. Hearst magazines have their own area. PC Magazine, one of
the giants of the Ziff-Davis chain, enraged many Netfolks with
clueless articles suggesting a rather thorough ignorance of the
Internet and its reasons for existence. But guess what. Now Ziff-
Davis has a wonderful Web area with generous samples from its
magazines, including PC. The German newsmagazine Der Spiegel is
on the World Wide Web, too, complete with some news in English;
from Japan, specialized publications serve Net audiences ranging
from gays to office workers.
I learned of the most dramatic use of cyberspace by a magazine
just as I was finishing this book. Omni, the popular science
publication, said it would forsake monthly paper editions in favor of
a version on America Online, augmented by just four print editions,
one each quarter. It expected to save some $4 million a year. The
newsletter Interactive Week Publishing Alert raised some valid
questions—copies of back articles from Omni were too hard to locate
—but even if the grand experiment failed, the model was out there.
A major publication was more or less forsaking pulped wood in favor
of computer networks.
Book publishers are catching up with newspapers and magazines.
Time Warner, Random House, Macmillan, and McGraw-Hill use the
Internet for promotion, and they will distribute more and more of
their books this way. Free classics like A Tale of Two Cities have been
a staple of the Net for years, thanks to voluntary efforts such as
Project Gutenberg. And now you can pay a few dollars to download
a short story by Stephen King or works by many others.
Meanwhile, however, some old-fogey publishers view the Internet
as an unfathomable virus transmitted via cable. That’s especially true
of the book business. People in it fear a massive bootlegging of their

wares. Using the Net, you can even pirate paper books; there is no
technical reason why machines cannot scan the latest from Philip
Roth or Tom Clancy, convert their novels to bits and bytes, and zap
them to your friends in Juneau. Software-based copy protection
could help safeguard electronic books. But I myself think there are
other solutions as well—for example, a national library fund to make
free or low-cost books practical and reduce the incentive for
bootlegging.
Paper publishers also complain that if electronic books are cheaper
to create and distribute, manuscripts will receive less editing. With a
good library system in effect, however, a way would exist to
highlight works of merit—marketers would enjoy less clout and we’d
see fewer best-sellers on astrology and more on history. And without
the distribution costs, more money could go to writers and editors.
Other obstacles also exist in the minds of publishers eyeing the
Internet. Some worry about finding a market for text offered
through a global network. And certain people in the book industry
also dread the competition from the many gigabytes of free material
that the Internet offers. Didn’t Samuel Johnson know best?—No one
but a blockhead ever wrote except for money. If nothing else, many
word people are captives of their senses. They hate reading off
computer screens; they want to hear a newspaper thunk against
their doors, hold Section A in their hands, hear it rattle, sniff the ink.
Going in the other direction, many people on the Internet love to
bash the print world as benighted and even a little worthless. Who
needs publishers when you can post your own books and little
magazines for the world to read on the Net? That’s simplistic in
many cases; I’ve got a little more faith in the editors at Knopf or
Viking than I do in the proofreading gang from the Department of
Chemistry or Joe’s Literary Bar.
People on the Net, however, are right to criticize the print media’s
ignorance of electronic publishing and computer networks. If nothing
else, many traditional publishers fail to grasp the potential here.
Looking at the old, underpowered machines that clutter their offices,
they may believe that computers won’t progress from there. An
intelligent staffer with a publishers group—someone I respected on

other matters—didn’t understand the promise of computers for
reading e-books. I shared this story with Robin Peek of Simmons
College, who coedited a book on electronic publishing for the
American Society for Information Science and the M. I. T. Press. She
told me that many book publishers just hoped that computers
wouldn’t improve until the publishers died or retired. Computers
keep stubbornly getting better, though; blurry screens and fragile
hard disks won’t always be the order of day.
More amazingly, a popular magazine misinformed some of us
Netfolks that we were “netgods.” Didn’t our Internet addresses end
with a prestigious “. net” rather than “. com” (the designation for a
commercial site) or “. edu” (for a school site)? Strange. Anyone can
pay $14 a month to ClarkNet or many other services and
automatically get an address like rothman@clark. net. So much for
my godliness.
Zeuslike, however, I’ll hurl thunderbolts at HarperCollins and
Doubleday. The former published the book that the immigration
lawyers in Arizona used to justify the off-topic ads that they had
inflicted on thousands of newsgroups. The Canter and Siegel guide
was in the same class as astrology books. It talked about spending
just $.0333 per thousand users per month to reach 30 million people
on the Net. Most of the people, however, can only use e-mail and
aren’t on Usenet or the Web. Doubleday erred in other ways. It let
Cliff Stoll smear cyberspace as “devoid of warmth and human
kindness.” Devoid? A rather all-encompassing word. In both cases
the paper publishers were entering an unknown world.
To give another example, a New Yorker article lamented the
destruction of library catalogues without really telling how electronic
libraries could do the job better. The article went on about the
handwritten annotations on the cards, and I could see the point
here. Couldn’t a card for a Civil War book include an informal
recommendation for a book on Antietam or Gettysburg? Must all
cross-references be official? So I could appreciate writer Nicholson
Baker’s worry about the fate of those beautiful wooden cabinets.
What he played down, however, is that technology can let electronic
librarians create quick paths from one work to another.[4.7]

Far from being exotic nowadays, this technology is the essence of
the World Wide Web. So if you looked up a general item on the Civil
War, you might see some annotated references to an item on
Antietam, and go there instantly with a click of the mouse.
Just as wrongly, an article in the Atlantic Monthly of September
1994 said future electronic books could perish because they used
many disk formats. “The End of the Book?” asked the headline over
T. J. Max’s doomsaying. But CD-ROMs and books on floppy disk are
just transitions. Unless legislators interfere in the most ham-handed
of ways, computer networks should be the natural homes for
electronic books. They could reach us more cheaply, and in greater
varieties, without the bottleneck of physical bookstores. So disk
standards should be just plain irrelevant in the end. The true raison
d’etre for the Internet is its ability to let many kinds of machines
share information without the least worry about floppies or magnetic
tape. Most of the time I don’t know if my no-name IBM clone is
talking to a Mac or a $5-million mainframe. Besides, we mustn’t
preserve books just physically; in a videocentric era we also need to
help them survive in the minds of readers, particularly those outside
the elite. We should spread books far and wide, then, and make the
technology as friendly to words as possible.
But tell that to Max. In his eagerness to put down electronic text,
Max depicted the print version of Wired magazine as hypocritical. He
wrote:
Although Wired communicates extensively by e-mail with
its readers, conducts forums, and makes back issues
available on-line, its much-repeated goal of creating a
magazine—currently called HotWired—that is especially
designed to exist electronically remains fuzzy. For the
moment this is no open democracy, and Wired is no
computer screen—its bright graphics would make a fashion
magazine envious. Wired celebrates what doesn’t yet exist
by exploiting a format that does: it’s as if a scribe copied
out a manuscript extolling the beauty that would one day
be print.

Strange. Just what’s so odd about using old technology to spread
word of alternatives, especially the dazzling e-magazines that
already enliven the Web? When Nicholas Negroponte published
Being Digital ( New York: Knopf, 1995 ), a bestselling collection of his
lively Wired essays, some Generation Xers bought it not for
themselves but for their parents—which was exactly what
Negroponte wanted.
Max is especially off target about HotWired. Today, just months
after he wrote of the publishers’ “fuzzy” goal, the magazine is one of
the most successful on the Net with far more than 100, 000 readers.
It makes massive use of hyperlinks—the technology I described by
way of the Civil War example. Within discussion areas, readers can
create links from their posts to text, pictures, and sound elsewhere
in the World Wide Web, including their own electronic pages—they
needn’t confine themselves to tiny letters to the editor. Simply put,
HotWired both praises and exemplifies the new medium.
I couldn’t care less, moreover, if this electronic magazine runs long
articles that have come out in print or could have—just so HotWired
also gives me new material. Not everyone on the Internet reads the
printed Wired. One of joys of the Net, moreover, is the ability to offer
greater levels of detail for those wanting it. What a grouch Max is.
He might as well be a monk lecturing Gutenberg about the glories of
calligraphy.
Even PC Magazine, one of my favorites, at times can be all wet
about the Internet and related topics. A columnist suggested that
most people on the Net be forced to pay for each letter sent out;
supposedly, Netfolks were too quick to e-mail each other. Excuse me.
Such an approach could kill off many of the mailing lists through
which academics and nonacademics swap ideas and research notes
en masse. A very small fee based on actual costs and Net
congestion? Maybe. But not one designed to minimize use. To the
columnist, however, the Net’s role as a petri dish may count less
than its promise as a corporate mailman. He misses a major point.
The Internet is one of the planet’s cheapest ways to transmit
knowledge, including the kind that might cure cancer or give us a
150-mpg automobile. While commerce on the Net is laudable, we

need those mailing lists as well—and not just for professors but
public schools, libraries, charities, psychological support groups, and
activists of all ideologies, to name just a few of the better examples.
The economics of the Net will make this possible, especially as
bandwidths increase to accommodate greater use of audio and video
—text just won’t cost that much. Alas, the columnist in this instance
failed to understand the Internet and its possibilities.
I myself won’t claim omniscience about the Net. Once I saw a
message on a mailing list from someone pushing for a huge National
Knowledge Foundation to benefit educators, librarians, journalists,
and investigators. The post mentioned international topics, among
others, and flares went off in my head. I posted some sharply
critical, journalistic questions, wondering if the post had come from
a CIA type. Some people on the list cheered me on while I pressed
for public answers. It turned out that the post was from a former
Company man, and as I persisted in querying Robert David Steele
about his funding and motives, he sent me a colorfully worded note
that might have made a Paris Island drill instructor envious. I quoted
his e-mail, as I would have done if writing this up for a magazine.
What a way to justify my fears of the intelligence establishment
playing too powerful a role in determining the content of material
online. I remembered the valuable exposés that the press had done
of the CIA years ago; we need to separate U. S. journalists from
spies, lest impartiality of the news media suffer. This debate I would
win.
But I didn’t. In fact, I suffered a major debacle; flame after flame
from bystanders assailed me. Even though I told Robert Steele I
wanted public answers, people felt that I had violated the traditional
prohibition against quoting private posts in public, at least with
names attached. Some of the bluntest Anglo-Saxonisms came from
luminaries on the Internet. People wanted perfect freedom to speak
their minds in messages deemed private, just as professors and
students in class would want to be free to say outrageous things
without ending up on the front pages of the local paper. I, on the
other hand, had applied journalistic expectations to the Net. A
reporter might end up with a better story if a celebrity exploded

during an interview and this fact came out in print. But on the
Internet, the freedom to be outrageous in private mattered more
than the freedom to quote, even with advanced warning. Yes, I had
questions about this custom. What if people took advantage of this
Netiquette to engage in sexual or racial abuse, or just abuse, period?
Should rules really be hard and fast? Just the same, in Net terms, I
was the loser here because I wore my Writer Hat at the wrong time.
Luckily the story ended happily. Robert Steele and I, while
disagreeing, made our peace. I went to one of his conferences and
shook his hand. Later I happily discovered that he shared my hatred
of the Clipper chip, the loathsome White House scheme to make it
easier to snoop on citizens’ communications. He was far more
openminded than I’d originally expected. Even without that
consideration, however, a feud just didn’t make sense here. Canter
and Siegel may claim you can reach 30 million people in one swoop,
but as I say repeatedly, the Net is a series of communities, some of
them rather small-townish. Within our somewhat overlapping circles,
it would have been mutually harmful for Robert Steele and me to
squander time and reputations on a protracted flame war.
Other kinds of clashes take place between Internet culture and
that of traditional media types; in the eyes of many people on the
Net, print people are not the only villains. Dateline NBC ran a story
about children using computer connections to locate recipes for
making bombs. The children, however, could have done the same at
bookstores or public libraries. Dateline’s episode reminded one
Netizen of the time NBC secretly used a hidden ignition system to
show that an automobile could explode. Just as bizarrely, in print
and on the air, some journalists love stories about the Internet as a
playground for child molesters. If we on the Net were a religious or
ethnic group, we could start an antidefamation league and keep it
forever busy.
By Net standards, the media bumble in yet other ways. If you’re a
newspaper or magazine journalist, you may have been reared to
neuter yourself about The News; no opinions online, please. On the
Net, however, many people are suspicious if you do not join the
crowd and speak out. They dislike net-thropologists; that is, media

people and others who study the Net rather than contribute to it.
Among some journalists the standard modus operandi is to post
questions for an article, then vanish without sharing anything with
the Netfolks.
Happily, this is changing somewhat. In fact, you can find a few
journalists from the New York Times, Wall Street Journal,
Washington Post, and other major papers speaking up online about
matters dear to them. Recently a reader flamed the Post for its
Internet coverage (“what those idiots at the Post write isn’t worth
minimum wage”). Alluding to software that can screen out messages
from offensive people, reporter John Schwartz punched right back:
“It’s bozo filter time.” He had been using online services for years,
and here, it showed. The old stereotype, in which all members of the
major media are clueless, just doesn’t fly any more. Not too long
ago somebody shared a New York Times article—discussing some
other people’s proposal for a national digital library—with hundreds
of a members of a list devoted to law in cyberspace. He did not ask
permission from the Times. A pithy reference to copyright law then
emanated from none other than Peter Lewis, who had written the
article and was a regular on the list.
So how are Netfolks treating Lewis nowadays? He e-mailed back
an answer in prose worthy of a discussion group on the Internet
itself:
It took me a while to get used to being flamed by pencil-
dicked geeks who hide behind their terminals, saying things
I’m sure they’d never dream of saying to my face. But now
I’ve become something of a connoisseur of flamage, and
while I regret that it is widespread on the Net, I regret
more that the quality of flaming is almost uniformly weak. I
now savor good flames and ignore the rest. On the other
hand, it took me almost as long to get used to having
instant feedback, often pointed and critical and right-on, to
my writing. While there is a danger of a “chilling effect”
from flamage, perhaps subtly influencing reporters to back
off a subject in anticipation of a flood of “Dear Clueless”

letters, I think the overall benefit of instant and widespread
reader feedback is a Good Thing. Perhaps all rookie
reporters should be required to write a Net story just to let
them know that they do not write in a vacuum, whether
their beat is the Internet or the police station or sports.
Like the police beat, the Internet comes with its set of rules—as
my experience with the CIA alum vividly showed. Some on the Net
attach a statement to every post saying it’s copyrighted. Others just
worry that the wrong set of people may read and quote their more
outspoken messages. Lewis considers list and newsgroup posts to be
public: “My mother once advised me, long before she knew I would
be a journalist, ‘Never put anything on paper that you wouldn’t want
to see on the front page of the New York Times.’”
Still, Lewis normally catches up with the writers of posts he plans
to quote. “However, the reason has more to do with verification than
with netiquette. In cyberland as well as in the real world, as you
know, the fact that someone’s name and address appear in a letter
does not guarantee the identity of the writer.” Lewis reminded me
that “half a century ago some newspapers forbade reporters from
quoting sources contacted by telephone on the same rationale: How
do you really know that was Mr. Doe on the phone if you didn’t see
him? In cyberville, not only can we not see our sources, but neither
can we hear them.” And then a few sentences later came the
electronic signature, “Pete (at least, you think it’s Pete) Lewis.”[4.8]
Other challenges exist online. When reporters use e-mail for
interviews, they take away the element of surprise—often the surest
route to the best answer. “Also,” says Jordan Green, a Canadian
freelancer who relies heavily on e-mail, “there is no body language
or voice intonation in e-mail. We do have our various symbols to
>>>highlight<<< and _emphasize_ WORDS and feelings:-) but
there is far more which cannot be picked up.”
In the end, however, computer networks will make the press
better informed, not worse. Via Lycos, for example, a searching tool
on the Web, I can track down files written by just the right person to
interview or find background information that someone archived

from the relevant newsgroup. Besides, who says that all interviews
are confrontational? Often e-mail is just right, and I can always use
the telephone to fill in gaps. “I used to ask, ‘What’s your fax
number?’ at the end of a phone interview,” says a magazine writer
named Peggy Noonan.[4.9] “Now I also ask, ‘What’s your e-mail
address’ because it’s often much faster to post a question or send a
draft for approval via e-mail than by another means.” Some
journalists might object to showing drafts to sources. But Noonan
clearly sees the networks as a godsend for other purposes as well.
Another believer is Arik Hesseldahl, a young reporter with the
Idaho State Journal in Pocatello who, like many journalists of his
generation, grew accustomed to the technology in college.
“Remember that flesh-eating bug scare a few months ago?” he said.
“I got in touch with a doctor in England who debunked all the
rumors and media hype, which is what it was—hype. Just today I am
looking for an expert on nuclear fuel reprocessing equipment who is
untainted by the Department of Energy and the rest of the federal
nuke bureaucracy. Already I’ve gotten five suggestions for experts.”
I myself see other advantages for people in the pulped-wood
world; via the Net I don’t just approach editors—I hear from them
out of the blue when they like my postings. Other freelancers have
also benefited. Steven Sander Ross, a professor at Columbia
University, uses the Net to communicate with European magazines
that pay better than those in the States. Just as the Net creates
global markets for florists and sellers of teddy bears, it multiplies
opportunities for the best writers. That is true for newspaper and
magazine writers now and will be increasingly true for authors of
books. Mind you, there is a downside, too. The Net may actually hurt
the worst writers as they face more competition, whether from
professionals across the planet or from the free material that
Netfolks share with each other.
Here are three case histories that should be of interest to writers,
editors, publishers, and the rest of the cosmos:
 Case History 1. The News&Observer has used the Internet not
only to reach the denizens but also to get existing readers and

advertisers on the Net. In an era when so many greedsters hope
to charge outrageous fees to consumers for online information, the
N&O is hoping that ads will pay much or even most of the
freight.
 Case History 2. Time Warner, as noted, is putting magazines and
book excerpts on the Internet, and it’s doing so in ways befitting
the medium. Many of the same concepts carry over from online
newspapers, which is why this section and the next will be much
shorter than Case History 1. In fact, so far, an N&O-style business
model seems to be influencing Time at least somewhat.
 Case History 3. Laura Fillmore runs an online bookstore that not
only sells books but gives them away on the Internet. She even
used the Net to promote a pulped-wood book that has sold
hundreds of thousands of copies. Fillmore’s ideas are significant
because she is working hard to reconcile publishers’ needs with
those of society at large, and I commend one of her business
models as an alternative to pay-per-read gouges. The ultimate
answer, in my own opinion, is a national digital library and a
program to drive down the cost of book-friendly hardware. Using
this approach—a mix of editorial and technical wizardry to add to
the value of plain text—good publishers would flourish. Readers
and writers would come out ahead, too.
Finally, I’ll offer an update on the N&O and other publications on
the Internet. When Frank Daniels described the Net as
“unorganized” and “unruly,” he might also have been talking about
certain trends in his own industry. A surprising twist unfolded in the
story of the N&O.
Newspapers on
the Net:

The Raleigh
Experiment
More than two decades ago in a scuffy-floored room at the
University of North Carolina, not that far from the N&O, I heard
Professor Walter Spearman expound on the prickly question of
uppity letters to the editor. What if a reader taunted, “You’ll never
print this?” The crux of Walt Spearman’s wisdom was this: Don’t go
for the bait. If you don’t want to print it, don’t.[4.10] He was teaching
me to be, in modern parlance, a “gatekeeper”—to decide which
news and opinions made it into print and which didn’t. Only so many
column inches existed on the editorial page, and we journalists were
to watch over this space as if it were the Mona Lisa. Without the
slightest apology, we should tell the public what to read, and besides
lording over the editorial pages, we should inflict the same front
page stories on everyone. The notion that each reader could write
regularly for other readers, or that he or she could see wire service
stories online, was as sacrilegious as it was science fiction-like.
By the end of the 1970s, however, at Duke, UNC, and N. C. State,
hackers were paving the way for Usenet, a series of discussion areas
on the Internet and on bulletin board systems that let everyone have
a say—from Nazis to Maoists. Together with talk radio and with other
forms of computer communications, Usenet could help Americans
bypass the gatekeepers. Readers wouldn’t see on their screens an
appealing combination of headlines and Times Roman type. But no
blue pencils would be around to scratch out the heresies of
nonjournalists.
Usenet in the end wouldn’t just carry alt. activism or comp. general
or alt. sex; it would also be home to a nice little electronic newspaper
called ClariNet, which in 1995 enjoyed 100,000-plus readers, and
which each day let readers choose from among hundreds of
dispatches from Reuters, the Associated Press, and more specialized
services. My friend Jim Besser covered Washington for a string of
Jewish newspapers. He could dial up ClariNet, other sections of

Usenet, and the Internet at large and see material that might take
days and days to wend its way into the Washington Post, assuming
it ever got there at all. Usenet in the end was more of a wire service
than a newspaper; that just may have been its real triumph. Some
old print people hated ClariNet, seeing it as a threat to their
gatekeeping. For a while, ClariNet sent out the columns of Dave
Barry, the quirky but popular humorist enjoyed by thousands of
Netheads. Then, however, his syndicate pulled him off the service.
Illegal copies had wafted all over the Internet, and the bootlegging
had surely outraged client newspapers—the main reason; but a
second, minor one may have existed as well—the hostility between
the Net and many members of the print media.
The Internet was partly why Michael Crichton, the author of the
novel Jurassic Park, could shrug off newspapers and some other
mass media as “tomorrow’s fossil fuel. ” The Cable News Network
and radio talk shows are not the only threats to the hegemony of
the old-time gatekeepers. So are the Internet, CompuServe, America
Online, GEnie, Delphi, and, of course, the more than 50, 000 bulletin
board systems run by hobbyists and others. “Newspapers, ” wrote
the media critic Jon Katz, “have been foundering for decades, their
readers aging, their revenues declining, their circulations sinking,
their sense of mission fragmented in a world where the fate of
presidents is slugged out on MTV, Donahue, and Larry King Live. ”
I was fascinated, then, to learn that the old News&Observer was
on the Net now. Was the N&O serving readers better? With the
above in mind I spent several weeks talking to the Raleigh people on
the phone and via e-mail, and studying the electronic versions of the
newspaper, both the free samples on the Net and the version for
paying customers.
My conclusions were positive, though not entirely. Katz, the author
of the “Still Suck” article in Wired, would have disliked some aspects
of the N&O’s electronic efforts. Wired had asked, “How can an
industry which regularly pulls Doonesbury strips for being too
controversial possibly hope to survive online? ” And, sure enough, if
you were on the Internet by way of the N&O’s service in fall 1994,
you couldn’t subscribe to the alt. sex string of newsgroups. Moreover,

unlike the Time areas online, the N&O’s BBS had not sprouted
hundreds of messages from free-spirited readers and editors. Truly
controversial postings were rare. And yet the editors were clearly
moving away from the traditional gatekeeping role. Meanwhile, the
N&O was enriching the Internet by way of well-written news stories
and features—many available for free. Flaws aside, this was a fine
example of how the print media could befriend the Net and the
young people who favored computer screens over pulped wood.
Frank Daniels III, the executive editor, tinkered with computers
himself in high school two decades ago, and as early as the late
1980s he was using Macs to shuffle around stories on the pages of a
magazine that his family owned in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Working with a stock analyst, Daniels created a computerized
database of the top fifty companies in the Charlotte area, and that,
in turn, led to a newsletter. So early on, Daniels saw how high tech
could spawn lucrative opportunities. He also saw the negatives. The
owners of the Los Angeles Times, Knight-Ridder, and other
organizations were experimenting with Videotext, which allowed
news stories to scroll across television screens.
Such endeavors were brave. They were also premature. Videotext
at the time cost the customers too much, and just as the Prodigy
service would err later on in the same way, the newspapers failed to
appreciate the fondness of many customers for typing to each other.
Reading news stories and shopping from home weren’t enough.
Many U. S. dailies would go on to flounder even on pulped wood.
Whether Americans were watching video-cassettes or hang gliding,
millions had other uses for their time, especially baby boomers.
Some 60 percent of the households in Wake County had once
subscribed to the N&O; by the late 1980s, just 40 percent did.
Newspapers kissed off much of the market, jacked up their prices,
and began seeing themselves as a way for advertisers to reach at
least the Oldsmobile set if not the BMW set. And yet, even by those
criteria, the N&O was a slacker. Back then, as it does today, the
Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill area boasted one of the highest
concentrations of Ph. D. s in the country. Some 40 percent of the
households now own computers, more than 10 percent can go

online, and the average home price is well on the way to equaling
that of some major metropolitan areas. Even five years ago, and
long before, high tech was enriching the Research Triangle.
But would the N&O adapt to this new market, a harbinger for
many other areas in the United States and elsewhere? Frank Daniels
saw the newspaper as a change-proof antique, and he was ready to
dump his N&O stock and sink the money into an online service.
Then Daniels got some journalistic religion at a newspaper
seminar, the secular equivalent of a good Baptist soaking. To hear
him tell it, he suddenly understood that “the relationship between a
newspaper and a community has such a richness and history that
communities shouldn’t lose that.” And he felt that online services
could take advantage of those relationships with readers and
advertisers. Today the N&O goes by this philosophy, not entirely
but to a great extent. Readers can e-mail many of their favorite
writers, while long-time advertisers can buy X number of column
inches in the paper editions and receive exposure in the electronic
editions.
Something else, however, may have bound Frank Daniels to his
paper as well—old family stories and the memories they stirred. The
first Daniels landed in North Carolina several hundred years ago, and
the family reunions continue to this day. Frank III’s great-
grandfather, Josephus Daniels, purchased the N&O at a bankruptcy
auction in 1894. He carried on as one of the state’s more colorful
and outspoken publishers, with a strong populist streak, and took
time off in Washington to serve as secretary of the Navy under
Woodrow Wilson. I ran across Josephus on the Internet, just as
serendipitously as I had found A. C. Snow. Through the American
Memory Project at the Library of Congress, I could hear Josephus
honor two naval heroes with a speech called “There Is No Rank in
Sacrifice.” I passed on word of my discovery to Bruce Siceloff, an
online editor, and he played another Daniels’ speech for the clan
while showing off the paper’s marvels of technology. Frank Jr.,
publisher of the N&O, tapped the arm of a cousin who had just
walked into the room. “That’s your grandfather,” he said as the

spooky old wax recording crackled away in its new electronic
incarnation.[4.11]
Josephus, though his racial views softened, reflected the
separatism of many Carolinians in the first half of the twentieth
century. The paper itself changed. It eventually hired Claude Sitton,
a Pulitzer winner notable for his civil rights reporting in his days with
the New York Times. The N&O in some ways became the Times
South. Reporters fought racial injustices. Frank III portrayed the
paper of that era as never having met a cause it didn’t like. What’s
more, he said the N&O, although exposing politicians on the take,
was too quick to editorialize for local programs that raised local tax
rates. I myself favored the crusading kind of newspaper—in fact, one
risk of a high-tech orientation was that it could turn a newspaper
into an uncritical cheerleader for business if editors were not careful
—but I could understand Daniels’ concern over government
spending. At any rate some felt that the N&O was losing touch with
many readers, and so Frank Jr. and the others on the board of
directors agreed to let Frank III serve as executive editor in the
wake of Sitton’s retirement.
The contrast between the old and new editors couldn’t have been
more stark. Sitton was a formal man who insisted that his reporters
wear suits and ties. Frank III relaxed the dress code. In place of a
sign with his editorial title, he stuck up one that said simply, “Frat
Man.” Old-timers groaned that this young Duke alum lacked enough
journalistic experience. The man had been the newspaper’s
operations manager. Wasn’t it apparent? For each year of experience
on the State side of newspapering, you could subtract two years of
experience with the Church.
Even under Sitton, the reporters typed away on a modern
publishing system for newspapers. But that was more or less all they
did—write. Many could just as well have been pounding away on old
Smith Coronas. They hadn’t any desire to learn the technology, not
when there were doors to knock on, vote counts to check, political
corruption to chronicle, Ku Klux Klan rallies to report, and courthouse
records to search the old-fashioned way. Young Daniels set to work
changing all that, and with the most surpassing of allies. The news

librarians almost instantly grasped the potential of computerized
databases. So did Pat Stith, the senior investigative reporter. The N
& O would go on to collect state records showing traffic or hunting
violations, or others, and then seek out patterns. “We analyzed all
the speeding tickets,” said Daniels, “and found out what percentage
of tickets were given at each mile-per-hour level. It turns out that if
you go 63 miles per hour in a 55-mile-per-hour zone, you have less
than a 1 percent chance of getting a ticket.” Via the same
quantitative techniques, the N&O could evaluate the programs of
local government. By the time Daniels had effected his
transformation, he had squeezed dozens of personal computers into
an already-crowded newsroom.
A year or so after Frank Daniels III became executive editor, he
first beheld the Internet over at North Carolina State. “An
engineering student said, ‘Have you seen this?’ and he showed me
Usenet. And about forty-five minutes later, while I was thirty minutes
late for a meeting, I was speechless. I walked out. I was just
buzzing with the possibilities.” Daniels saw some engineering
newsgroups and, yes, some sexually related ones. “I couldn’t believe
how many people I saw talking together, just following each other’s
conversations. The letters to the editor at the time were the only
connection the News&Observer had with its readers.
“Our business is connecting people. Here was a whole world that
existed without our knowledge. It was a small world and an elitist
world, but it confirmed my earlier belief that computers were going
to be ubiquitous.”
Effortlessly Daniels understood that Usenet wasn’t Videotext—
people wanted you to talk back. So the Internet was at least on his
mind as a possibility for the time when the numbers were right.
Daniels for the moment pushed into less exotic areas; for example,
he started a useful, lively, but expensive fax newsletter for the elite,
The Insider, which covered North Carolina politics with a
commitment to detail missing from the daily press. The N&O also
offered sophisticated research services, using the databases it was
amassing. And the paper let readers dial up stories over the
telephone through a technology known as Audiotext.

The electronic action, however, really took off after Daniels hired
George Schlukbier, a computer-oriented librarian who had worked
wonders at the Sacramento Bee. Like Daniels the frat boy, Schlukbier
flaunted a few eccentricities within bounds. An electronic signature
at the bottom of his Internet messages identified him as “Chief Bull
Goose Looney,” a tribute to the giant Indian who terrorized Nurse
Ratched in One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, the Ken Kesey novel.
Some, of course, might argue that the Internet is itself a virtual
asylum with the inmates in charge.
Schlukbier and Daniels checked out Prodigy and America Online to
see about getting on those networks and decided that the numbers
stank. Yes, Prodigy-style services already had their networks in
place, and the Los Angeles Times and papers in George, New York
and elsewhere would go on to sign up. But the N&O concluded—
rightly, in my opinion—that the online services would need the
newspapers more than the newspapers would need the online
services. Newspapers were the best source of steady, detailed news
about local communities. Each year the N&O spent $12 million
covering mainly local and state news, an amount that even a giant
like Prodigy could not replicate everywhere. “They’ve got their view
of the world that’s defined by whatever technology they adopted at
the time they started their service,” Daniels would later say. “We got
uncomfortable with the fact we’d be living their rules, and the
customers would be their customers.”[4.12]
Some other newspapers felt happy with Prodigy. “No,” said Mike
Gordon, an editor with Cox Newspapers in Atlanta, “Prodigy isn’t
taking most of the money.” What’s more, his online edition could
enjoy revenue from online ads. Still, more and more publishers were
turning to the Internet rather than Prodigy-type alternatives, and the
balance of power changed. When Microsoft started a new online
service later, it offered newspapers as much as 80 percent of
revenue—at least several times the amount that Prodigy had offered
the N&O. (The Atlanta papers would themselves end up on the
Internet eventually, not just on Prodigy.)
Instead of relying on a Prodigy-style service, Schlukbier started a
locally oriented BBS with an Internet connection and a strong

emphasis on schoolchildren, not just the adult readers of today. This
orientation may have baffled many. Some newspaper publishers
were too myopic to see past the next quarter, especially if they
worked for the big chains. Exceptions did exist, of course. Knight-
Ridder, for example, regardless of its public ownership and its
Videotext flop, was still pouring millions into the new technology. As
a family-owned newspaper, however, without security analysts
breathing down its corporate neck, the N&O was especially free to
experiment. Schlukbier believed that a decade would pass before 40
or 50 percent of the homes in Raleigh were online, and by then the
children would be of customer age.
“By focusing on third-graders,” Schlukbier said, “I’ve got ten years
to learn from them what information they really need and want.”[4.13]
What they hoped for, in many ways, didn’t seem like a newspaper at
all. Rather they wanted their own tools. The bulletin board
blossomed with imaginary worlds in which, for example, Frank
Daniels was the owner of a fictitious newsstand. Children could
wend their ways through cyberspace by using written descriptions
and computer commands to tell where they were and what they
were doing. George Schlukbier’s young son, Shane, designed a
mythical camp online with danger-ridden woods. Some may have
wondered how this applied to newspapers; I myself did. And then it
dawned: if newspapers would be increasingly two-way in the future,
just like the Net, then didn’t it make sense to see how the children
interacted with each other, as they did in role-playing games? The
children could change as they grew older, or moved away from the
area when their parents packed up for another job with IBM, but the
journalists could still observe the basic patterns.
The N&O put more than 6,000 children and 700 teachers online
for free. NandOLand was the name of the educational service
designed with children in mind; a mouse click on a cloud, for
example, would take children to a NASA area on the Net. The
students could send electronic mail to each other or type to each
other instantly. “I have seen children who never cared what they
wrote turn to a dictionary rather than send a letter to a key pal with
misspelled words,” said a teacher named Stephanie Toney. “I have

seen a child with a severe reading disability sit for hours and
concentrate on e-mail to another person on the other side of the
world. His English teacher would have given her right arm to interest
him in reading and writing for this period of time.”
Granted, NandOLand wasn’t the entire solution to the needs of
children. Many couldn’t spend much time on a machine at school
and lacked one at home. But the program was much better than the
alternative: expensive school connections to the Net or no Internet
at all.
Like the children, the N&O itself was learning—about the local
schools and other institutions and the Net itself. “How many
newspaper editors and reporters get to talk with students, parents,
and teachers any time they want to without making a big deal of it?”
asked Daniels.[4.14] And so the educational coverage was better.
Rosalind Resnick, publisher of Interactive Publishing Alert, wrote that
the N&O was “at the head of the pack when it comes to promoting
interactivity between its readers and reporters.” By the summer of
1995 every staff member, including those in circulation and
advertising, would be able to go on the Net from their desks.
Daniels’ own Net address showed up on the paper’s editorial page
each day. The N&O was publishing a dozen or two Internet items
each month, complete with a column called “Net Rider.” How
different the paper was from a rival in nearby Durham: “We don’t
print many Internet stories,” a staffer there said when I asked to
speak to whoever covered the Net. The words were spoken almost
in a way to suggest that “Internet” was synonymous with “N&O.”
Not everyone was happy with the N&O’s Internet service. Around
700 people had subscribed commercially by fall 1994, paying $20 a
month, and some rightly complained about the look and feel of the
BBS and the busy phone lines they had encountered during the
summer. When I posted a query on the Internet, at least half of the
replies were hostile to the online N&O. Some showed a knee-jerk
hatred because they disagreed with the paper’s politics. But others
were right on target. The BBS incarnation of NandO. Net, the name
for the commercial part of the online endeavors, was more of a
rutted dirt road than an eight-lane information highway. Customers

for some months had trouble dialing up the service’s modems for
want of enough phone lines. Other glitches arose. The service prided
itself on the ability to whip people back and forth between the local
board and the Internet-related services without any effort. And yet
in making the transitions, customers suffered delays and software
glitches that they might not encounter with a more polished service.
Schoolchildren and BBS junkies were the best kinds of people to
enjoy the wild ride and the scenery.
The online N&O responded with some technical improvements;
the paper added many more phone lines and gave customers the
ability to use Mosaic to point and click their way through the Web.
Mosaic had a much smoother feel than the BBS software. By late
1994 the N&O was offering the public an electronic newspaper and
the Internet at the competitive rate of $20 a month while helping to
subsidize the educational side. And it was serving people with
different levels of equipment. The BBS was designed to work
especially well with less powerful machines and snailish modems
that were far too slow for Mosaic.
On the Net, the people who answered my queries had another
major complaint—the inability of NandO. Net to make alt. sex-style
groups conveniently available. Frank Daniels made no apologies.
However liberal towns like Chapel Hill might be, the state as a whole
was of the opposite bent. And that included more than a few church-
goers in Raleigh. “The community standards of our community don’t
mix with some of the sexual parts of Usenet,” Daniels said, “so we
edit them out.” In addition, most subscribers were children. “I have
a seven year old,” he said, “and I don’t want him delving into
alt. sex. bestiality or those other places.” Many of the Netheads would
have said that one person’s “editing” was another’s “censorship.” I
myself, however, understood Daniel’s worries. At least two other Net
services were available in the same area, so it wasn’t as if he were
gatekeeping for the entire town; what’s more, he said that when the
software allowed, the sex-related newsgroups would be available as
an option. Just the same, the issue epitomized the clash between
the gatekeeping ethos and that of the Internet.

More serious than the lack of alt. sex, to my mind, was Daniels’
failure to appreciate sufficiently the political freedom of Usenet, the
same service that had attracted him to the Internet in the first place.
I complained to him that his own BBS included far, far less in the
way of political discussion than I’d have wanted, and I contrasted
this to the robust debates of Usenet. “To be honest, David,” he said,
“I think one of the least useful pieces of the Internet so far is their
political discussions. They’re not very good ones. There’s a lot of
flaming. The political discussions aren’t very productive. I follow
mainly the local ones here. These people discuss national issues and
never have a policymaker looking in there. So why discuss it if it isn’t
going to have an impact on policy?”
While Daniels was worlds ahead of newspaper editors at large, he
was showing the vestiges of the gatekeeping mindset that the new
technology had made obsolete. I myself disliked unmitigated
flaming. And yet there were times when harsh words were called for.
The N&O didn’t wimp out when the editorial board attacked the Ku
Klux Klan or the more outrageous statements of Jesse Helms, the
right-wing senator. Why should people online be any different? And
although it might be nice for a policymaker to read my public
messages as soon as I sent them out—and, yes, I could recall
hearing out of the blue from the White House after one such posting
—that was hardly necessary. Democracy isn’t just a citizen writing to
a congressman. It is also citizens communicating with citizens,
educating, proselytizing; and with the economies of Usenet, more
citizens could reach their peers for greater enlightenment. And then,
if a consensus were reached, political action might ensue, such as
letters to Congress. So why must politicians be involved from Day
One? Daniels was out of touch here, and I hoped he’d catch on.
Admittedly NandO. Netters could hook up with the Usenet political
areas, even if the N&O played them down; but the newspaper
didn’t really promote political debates on the BBS itself. And it was
not just because Daniels believed that the readers disliked flaming
and extremism—it was also because he felt that real, live politicians
were not ready for online appearances yet. “When we can get
commitment from the politicians and policymakers, then we’ll make

a push at it. But not until it becomes something where our
community can have really productive discussions. I don’t want to
train them not to like them. What happens is that the people on the
Net are trained not to like them. Extremists and flamers love them.”
I supposed there were a lot of us undesirables, however; for
alt. activism and similar areas were among the more popular
newsgroups on the Net—no match for alt. sex, but certainly not small
time.
If Daniels had had a complete set of Net values, he would have
understood the benefits of debate online, and not just the political
action but the education. I myself was liberal. And yet when
discussing information policy, I could learn at times from the most
zealous of Libertarians and Objectivists. Some were among the most
advanced of the technologists. In fact, their technical backgrounds
may have led to their hatred of regulation—they loathed the
bureaucrats who could not fathom the direction in which computers
and communications were headed.
To his credit, Daniels at least was not calling for censorship of
Usenet; he was merely saying that he wanted his own service to be
different. What’s more, technology and marketing forces, the great
deciders of cyberspace, might change his mind for him.
Just as he had assumed in the first place, people on the Net
wanted to talk—not just to the N&O but to each other about all
kinds of topics, including material in the paper itself. And the more
comfortable the readers grew with the online world, the more
spirited, the more Usenet-like, would be the discussions. No, the
meek would not suddenly turn into flamers. But the thrill of
technology would be less of a distraction, and they would pay more
heed to what they had to say and grow more adventurous about it.
On the N&O’s present BBS, with its often awkward commands,
many people were not even leaving messages for each other.
Instead they typically used the system at a more primitive level to
type out their thoughts with the other person online at the same
time. I hated this approach. It brought to mind Dave Barry’s crack
that the Internet was like CB radio with typing.

Even if Daniels still did not enjoy the political debates on the Net
itself, he was living up to the old tradition of sharing material with
the rest of the world. In that sense his newspaper was exemplary.
The N&O didn’t just offer news, discussion areas, and games for its
subscribers: Sample news and features were free to anyone who
wanted to read them. That was how I’d first run across A. C. Snow.
I’d seen the N&O’s name on a list of newspapers, and A. C. had
caught my eye as I was wandering through the Gopher that stored
sample news stories and columns from the paper. The World Wide
Web, however, was the best way to try out the electronic N&O.
When I dialed up the main page for NandO. Net, I could see a
colorful, bluish logo and enjoy a newsstandish atmosphere, with
scads of goodies to explore. The N&O differed from many
electronic newspapers. It didn’t just inflict on readers a digest of
generic news, with only the most cursory helping of original
material.
I read samples from the regular N&O and specialized publications
such as the Insider; enjoyed brief but regularly updated electronic
news intended for the Net itself; wandered through a little bookstore
with cover shots from books by Snow and other columnists; wended
my way through tens of thousands of words from a journalism
seminar at Harvard; soaked up long, multimedia features; dialed up
samples of rock music; and ventured into the sports area—the N &
O’s most popular material on the Web.
The sports area was the baby of a bearded, forty-something editor
named Eric Harris who had turned into a Nethead, and who like
Schlukbier came with a nickname: “Zonker.” A child, seeing the beard
and taking in the personality, had compared him to the Doonesbury
character. That was a little unfair. Zonker of the comics is a goof-off,
while Zonker of the Net is a workaholic whose messages might bear
4 A. M. time stamps. Harris is Webmaster—the man with the daily
responsibility for the content of the Web area in general—but his
true love was sports. He packed the server with game schedules.
During the ’94 baseball strike the N&O indulged fans with whimsy
such as “Cybersox Take the World Series”—reportage of mythical
games. “Need something to do while we wait for the owners and

players to resolve their differences?” the Web area asked on another
electronic page. “Well, the Baseball Server is doing its part.
Download the above images, tack them onto the wall, and buy a set
of darts. Then, every time you feel a twinge of baseball withdrawal,
grab a dart, think a ‘warm’ thought about one of the participants,
and let the fun begin.” And sure enough, Netfolks could print out
pictures of the villains, each of whom had a superimposed picture of
a dartboard and the wonderful caption: “The only losers are the
fans.”
The N&O also shared with the Net a variety of other material, of
which my favorite was North Carolina Discoveries. A lively feature
writer named Julie Ann Powers sought out offbeat places. In Lake
Norman, for example, she found that “houses and hangars ring the
airstrip and each lot comes with a grass taxiway to the paved and
lighted runway.” In Orient, a hamburger-and-hot-dog cook named
Red Lee claimed that at twenty-five cents each, his offerings were
the cheapest in the country. And in Tryon, the publishers of the Daily
Bulletin said that at 8 by 11 inches, their newspaper might be the
smallest in the world. Powers drove from town to town in a Ford
Explorer that she had nicknamed Barlowe after Arthur Barlowe—one
of the first Europeans to behold the state of North Carolina. Barlowe
was a gadgeteer’s heaven on wheels, full of audio and video
equipment. People on the Web didn’t just enjoy gloriously descriptive
stories from Powers: with Mosaic-style software they could see a
picture of her wearing a sun hat on a beach or gaze at sand dunes
or waterfalls or whatever she happened to be writing about at the
time. If they owned a sound card, they could hear, too. She walked
around carrying a microphone so large that it resembled a folded-up
umbrella.
Powers might well be one of the first multimedia reporters to work
for a Net-oriented daily newspaper. I asked her to share a few trade
secrets. She said she interviewed people twice. The first time she
gathered the basics for her regular story; the second time they
spoke while tape rolled. Powers said she never knew which sounds
would work out and which wouldn’t. A recording of a glorious
waterfall ended up sounding like a toilet flushing.

I asked about the challenge of balancing her traditional duties as a
reporter with those as an audio-oriented interviewer. Some old
hands in the N&O newsroom saw the gadgetry as a threat. It was
all too remindful of the days when computers were replacing
typewriters in the newsroom, and many reporters and editors balked
at being typesetters. But Powers turned the new technology to her
advantage. The microphone and electronic camera—a photographer
followed her around—made her more aware of her surroundings and
sensitive to new story angles. Once she did a story on Ten
Commandment Mountain. It was part of a Biblical theme park, a
peak in western North Carolina with God’s words spelled out in
“concrete letters each measuring five feet high and four feet wide.” A
roar from a giant lawn mower kept drowning out the voice of the
man she was interviewing. “They always ask,” he volunteered, “how
do you mow that mountain?” Presto, she had the magic quote to use
near the lead. “A special mower with a low center of gravity,” she
revealed, “tilts and leans up and down the steep planes.”
Whether reading about twenty-five-cent hamburgers or godly
peaks, I could scoot easily between pictures and words. The N&O
had a “North Carolina Discoveries” logo at the top of one page, a
picture of Powers in the same area, and then a list of the Discoveries
stories that she had done. By clicking my mouse on a list of story
headlines in blue letters, I could immediately go to the stories. When
I chose “Home Sweet Hangar,” I sped to the same headline atop a
color photo of an aviation buff inspecting “his Cessna 172 after
rolling it out of the hangar at his house in Lake Norman Airpark.”
Yes, the caption was there too. And then I saw the story lead with
an apt quote (“It’s like being an avid golfer and living on the golf
course”) followed by a list of other items. I could choose “Audio:
Talking about life on the flight line” if I wanted to hear an interview.
What’s more, if I’d set up my software, I could even have picked
“Video” and gone on to a list of short movies. I also saw background
items such as a list of “Triangle-area flight schools” and “FAA
regulations: How to get your pilot’s license.” The beauty of this
arrangement was that the N&O could provide all kinds of wonderful
details for the interested without inflicting them on others. Unless

they mouse-clicked the appropriate words in blue letters (or
whatever the special color), they would never see the material.
The N&O used the same approach on news stories. When North
Carolina was about to gas a man named David Lawson, readers
could click on the item “The Lawson Execution.” They could see a
schedule of the events ahead—from Lawson’s removal from his cell
to the EKG examination that would help certify his death. After the
Associated Press reported the execution, readers could click on a
headline and read the details. They could even summon up
“Preparing for the execution” or “How the gas chamber works.”
The Lawson story was a just a sample—the N&O at the time
wasn’t constantly doing multimedia on breaking news—but it was
easy to envision the future for American newspapers using the Web.
Imagine the blessings for journalists who wanted to write on neat
little odds and ends without getting in the way of their main articles.
They could merely add “links” to offshoot stories. Perhaps the reader
could even click and summon up a collateral audio report or even a
video. At first it might be hard to do all this on deadline, but links
would be a cinch as software improved. What’s more, newspaper
writers might evolve into true personalities just like their
counterparts on television. After all, if a reporter’s byline were in
blue letters, you could click your mouse to see a photo and maybe
even a bio featuring credentials—you could find out, for example, if
the legal reporter held a law degree. You could also quickly locate
copies of earlier work or a list of his or her favorite books.
Granted, electronic newspapers posed new challenges. Not all
stories lent themselves to multimedia, for example. What if
newspapers played down those that didn’t? “If you tried to do that
with a lot of news stories,” Julie Powers told me, “you would end up
serving the video masters rather than the news functions.” Still, in
the end, the reader would enjoy far more choices than before.

The Web, as I saw it, held out yet other possibilities for local
papers such as the N&O. Suppose you lived in Chapel Hill and
wanted to see what news had happened there in the past 24 hours;
you could click on a map of the Raleigh area and behold a story list
from your town. Neighborhood-level submaps could show still more.
You could read the most minor tidbits—for example, new requests
for zoning changes or items from neighborhood newsletters. Even
more helpful, you could find old stories and other background
information. Let’s say you were shopping for a condo on a certain
street. You might think the neighborhood was safe—Chapel Hill is a
university town, remember—but learn that many crimes had
occurred nearby. Furthermore, you could adjust the kind of
information that you summoned from the Web. For example, you
could see lists of houses for sale in a neighborhood and then retrieve
their photos along with audio sales presentations. Moving on to
another information category, you could uncover lists of nearby
stores or see test scores from the closest elementary school. And
you might even see ads from nearby restaurants and click on them
to order.
The food-related examples weren’t entirely hypothetical; Zonker
Harris pointed me toward me some mock ads from Hardee’s and a
chain called Little Caesar’s Pizza. The same business principles I
discussed in chapter 2 applied here. Rather than planning to inflict
vast quantities of material on the unwilling, the N&O made the ads
useful and entertaining. Elsewhere in the N&O area I saw an ad for
a computer dealer, among others, but the real triumph was the area
from Mammoth Records—with home pages for bands, promo
photos, discographies, tour dates, album covers, and more, including
a catalogue and, yes, free samples.
But what about the economics of all this? Via an electronic edition
the N&O wouldn’t collect the fifty cents it charged per hard copy
issue, but it wouldn’t have to buy newsprint and distribution
services. That was how George Schlukbier hoped the newspaper
would turn a profit eventually. The electronic activities, although not
yet profitable as a whole, were coming along. People on the Net, for
example, were calling up the pages within the N&O’s area several

hundred thousand times a week. A page was what you saw when
you clicked the mouse to call up an item, and each page could be
just a few lines of information, or go on for a number of screens.
Zonker Harris expected that by the end of 1994 as many people
would be dialing up the N&O as called up SunSite UNC, the popular
collection of files at the University of North Carolina. Readers
retrieved Mammoth Record’s pages some 35, 000 times a week. That
didn’t mean 35, 000 people—there was plenty of repeat business,
and of course the same people looked at more than one page—but
the numbers looked good as a start.
Just who, however, was reading the Web areas of the N&O and
other Internet publications? The Washington Post and many other
dailies had chosen to avoid the Net for the moment because they
thought that the right people weren’t there. And some marketers
and journalists tried to reinforce such arguments by citing a study of
4, 777 Web readers by researchers at the Georgia Institute of
Technology. Ninety-four percent were men, and 56 percent were 21 -
30 years old—almost half were students or faculty members or had
other university ties. “These are hardly the type of people to make
large consumer or business purchases, ” a San Francisco Chronicle
story observed. The experience of JoAnn and Bob Lilienfeld, as
recounted in chapter 2, showed that riches would not automatically
come to merchants on the Web. And yet the potential was there.
The Web readers uncovered by the institute weren’t charity cases—
just yups. Studying the readers of the Baseball server, the N&O
found they were a long way from poverty. Twenty percent of these
Netfolks, for example, earned $ 35, 000-$ 50, 000 a year, 18 percent
earned $ 50, 000-$ 75, 000, and 4 percent earned more than $ 75, 000.
And, of course, many of these Netfolks were young people who
would carry their Net habit over to their jobs and their personal
lives. Not surprisingly, Schlukbier claimed keen interest from
representatives of companies such as J. C. Penney and Radio Shack,
and, of course, from fast-food chains, which, in so many cases,
targeted their ads at the young.
Cleverly the N&O built on existing relationships with advertisers.
If you were already on the paper and bought X number of lines,

then you could get the Net as a bonus. North Carolina businesses
paid as little as $50 a month in basic fees to be in the N&O’s area
on the Net, not including add-ons such as design services. Big
national firms would pay well into the thousands. Given the newness
of the medium, this would scare off many—unless, like the N&O
itself, they saw the Net as an investment in the future. Then the
experiment might work. In my mind, however, there was one other
variable: What about national publications competing with local
papers for the same national advertisers? Already Time Warner and
the N&O were watching each other carefully.
Magazines: Time Warner
Typing away on Macintoshes on the fortieth floor of the Time Life
Building in Manhattan, ten floors above People magazine, a small
team started an area of the Web known as Pathfinder. It offered
electronic versions of Time Warner’s vast stable of magazines.
Zonker Harris at the N&O had a slogan, “May the best server win.”
The Durham newspapers might not be in the game so far, but Time
and brethren were.
Zonker was justifiably proud of the 300,000 or so accesses a week
that the N&O’s Web area was enjoying after several months on the
Web. But just within a week of start-up in fall 1994, the Time
Warner area was drawing more than 80,000 accesses a day. That
didn’t mean that the N&O’s efforts were doomed—hardly. But
despite all the talk about the Net being nirvana for smaller
companies, Fortune 500 corporations arrived with some advantages
of their own. Once readers grew comfortable with a certain area of
the Web, they might spend less time on other parts of the Net. This
wasn’t so much a pattern at the time, but as mass audiences
descended on the Net, corporate logos might count far more.
Beyond that, Time Warner already offered a daily version of Time—a
newspaper in effect. It was just one service among a rackfull of

publications. Readers could read up on foreign policy or the latest
Star Trek film in Time, take in reviews from Entertainment Weekly,
keep up with Ice-T and other hip-hop musicians in Vibe, or fire off
questions to authors of best-sellers from Warner Books.
An even greater threat to the N&O, in the long run, was the fact
that Time Warner didn’t just own magazines and book publishers. It
also owned pipes, including a cable operation in the Raleigh area.
And someday it might use cable TV lines to send the Net into homes
there, competing with the N&O, which had already been providing
Internet services. If no antitrust or other legal boundaries existed,
then Time Warner would be remiss in its duties to its stockholders if
it did not explore this route. Think what this would mean to users of
the World Wide Web. If an article came with fancy photos, they
might have to wait several minutes for the whole works to reach
them at a speed of 14.4 kilobits per second. But suppose Time
Warner used cable TV to bring the Internet to them. Their
televisions would still work with cable the usual way. But their
computers could share the cable and retrieve Web articles and other
material in a fraction of the time. Cable modems sold for hundreds
of dollars. But pilot projects were going on with other companies,
and the cost could soon drop to a fraction of that amount. More
important, big, well-financed corporations might be willing to modify
the old cable for these new capabilities.[4.15] What did this mean for
local, N&O-sized companies? Just as high tech had blurred the
difference between telephones and televisions, the Net itself was
blurring the barriers between local and national. It was unclear
whether the public would win or lose.
For better or worse, Time Warner’s area on the Net was part of an
evolution in cyberspace. The process had begun with the small
academic magazines and hobbyist publications that turned to the
Net as a cheap way to find readers. Many if not most still relied on
plain text without graphics; they were little more than archived
dispatches to mailing lists—which was fine because the words
mattered above all. One of the best of these was Adam Engst’s
Tidbits. Written for Apple owners, it also appeared on the World
Wide Web and bulletin board systems, and Engst claimed more than

100,000 readers—no small feat for a kitchen-table-style publisher.
Nonconglomerates still provided most of the magazines on the net,
and not all were for techies or sci-fi buffs. International Teletimes
was edited by Ian Wojtowicz, a gifted high school student who lived
in Vancouver, British Columbia. Teletimes went out over the Web
with fetching art, not just text, and some of the prose could have
graced Harper’s or the Atlantic. Recounting a winter trip by train, a
college student named Paul Gribble wrote: “Every now and then we
pass a lake, completely frozen over, flat and white, smooth as a
skating rink. I’d love to walk to the center of a big frozen lake like
that and just sit there for a while. I’d feel like the first blot of paint
on a fresh silk canvas.”
Many steps up from Teletimes, in business terms, was Global Net
Navigator. Like the N&O in North Carolina, GNN was trying to use
advertising to support its activities, and you could see ads from
companies as large as Digital Equipment Corporation. GNN was not
just technical. It posted informative, brightly written articles on
topics ranging from money to food and travel. Wired magazine was
on the Net, too, with an offshoot called HotWired, which itself
wandered far from technical topics and attracted lucrative ads from
the likes of Volvo and AT&T. None of these publications, of course,
happened to be a Household Name like Time Warner’s Time or
People. Many experts felt that as a profitable medium for big-time
magazines—and let’s not confuse size with quality or lack thereof—
the Internet had a long way to go.
Jeffrey Dearth offered at least an interim answer. Teaming up with
a small corporation with the grand name of the Internet Company,
Dearth offered the Electronic Newsstand. Like the Pathfinder or N &
O’s Net edition, the Newsstand was a godsend to browsers. You
could wander through sample articles from Business Week; Field &
Stream; The Economist; The New Yorker; National Review;
Maclean’s, Canada’s largest newsweekly; or The New Republic, of
which Dearth himself was publisher. The Time Warner experiment
notwithstanding, most of the Names were far behind. Dearth offered
them the equivalent of a catch-up course or at least some solid
remedial instruction. They could test the waters of the Net to see

how much interest their articles drew, before deciding whether to set
up their own areas there. Via the Newsstand, magazines could
accept subscription orders.
But order taking was a long way from fancier “interactivity”—to
use a pet term of media people—and this was where Time Warner’s
Pathfinder area would shine. The area didn’t just recycle magazines
on the Net, it also offered powerful tools to find old articles by typing
in search words or the names of topics. From the start, the
searching capability was among the more popular services. Soon
Pathfinder would include hypertext links that let you go from an
article on a certain topic to an ongoing discussion. Already Time
Warner provided special services such as one for gardeners. They
could type in their general wishes about flowers and supply their
location and other odds and ends, and then Time would offer tips on
what to grow. It also allowed inquirers find out how their
congressman or senator had voted on certain key issues. And many
more applications like this were on the way. What’s more, people
could talk back to Time Warner writers and others by way of an
advanced bulletin board system designed for the Web. It was much
easier to use than the N&O’s.
Not everyone liked the Web area. One woman hated the
“overstuffed” artwork—others said it gobbled up too much
downloading time. She also chided Time for putting out the online
version of Sunset magazine “for Northern Californians still living in
their ’50s ranch houses.” I myself, however, enjoyed the kitsch and
flashy, busy look of the Web area as a whole. That was the way the
real magazines came across; this was pop culture, not the Kenyon
Review.
Almost immediately the Time board teemed with lively talk on
issues ranging from Clintonian stupidities to, yes, the future of the
electronic medium. I felt much more comfortable here than in the
message area of the N&O; people on the Time board spoke their
minds more freely. Some amusing posts showed up. Amazingly, the
software let people key in their own identities, and the late Henry
Luce, cofounder of Time, arose from the grave as
luce@pastmytime. com. One message appeared, truthfully or not,

with the name of a staffer at U. S. News&World Report. He
promised that U. S. News would set up an outpost on the Net soon,
and someone at Time twitted him for not answering e-mail promptly.
Despite my fondness for the reporting in U. S. News, I had to agree.
Researching a Net guide for political activists, I’d written U. S. News
six months ago and had yet to receive an answer.
Time Warner also showed network savvy by following the example
of GNN and similar publications and providing some hypertext
pointers to the rest of the Internet, rather than expecting readers to
stay within its own area. Time Warner even enlisted some of its
household names in the cause. The electronic version of
Entertainment Weekly, for example, did not just review Madonna or
Springsteen or the latest Hollywood films; it also directed people to
popular, entertainment-oriented sites on the Net itself by way of
hypertext links. I still wanted to see many, many more links—a
strength of GNN. But I suspected that would come in time.
Planning the Pathfinder service, Time Warner had even consulted
with the publisher of Wired. “They’re providing real news, not just
PR blather or sales areas for their products,” said Chip Bayers, the
managing editor of HotWired, the Wired offshoot on the Web. And
he was right.
I myself was no cheerleader for Time Warner in some ways—I
worried about media concentrations.[4.16] But here the Suits deserved
their due. HotWired offered avant-garde graphics on the Web along
with services such as bulletin boards and free archives; I was
pleased, yet hardly surprised. Wired, after all, was still a bit of an
upstart despite heavy investment from a corporate arm of the
powerful Newhouse family.[4.17] But Time Warner was different—the
epitome of the journalistic and Hollywood establishments, a
company with many benefits from the status quo. I recalled the
upbeat stories that Time had run about the world of 500-channel
television. Such articles betrayed far more tolerance of the “one to
many” broadcast model, as opposed to the newer, more anarchistic
model of the Net. Many in the Time Life tower, especially on the
entertainment side, might still harbor these less adventurous visions.
And yet the company was now spreading its bets around. That

seemed sensible enough, given the chilliness that some test markets
had shown interactive TV.
A Time writer named Philip Elmer-DeWitt had grown more and
more attuned to the potential of the Net. He was a regular on The
WELL, the bulletin board system frequented by many of the elite
journalists on the Internet. Again and again Elmer-DeWitt showed
up on newsgroups and mailing lists with spunky, opinionated posts
on such topics as the media and telecommunications. He lent his
name to a successful legal campaign to aid Brock Meeks, a small
publisher on the Net who faced a libel suit from a mail-order tycoon
in Ohio. What’s more, Elmer-DeWitt was sensitive to the threats
from the Clipper chip, which Washington might use someday to
invade the privacy of millions of Americans. He clearly represented
the interests of his employer, but he did so with a good mix of wit
and smarts that endeared him to many on the Internet. His
electronic signature said, “Read Time on America Online where we
are paid to take abuse. ”
Enlivened by posts from Netfolks and WELLfolks whom Elmer -
DeWitt had befriended, Time’s message board thrived on America
Online. But now, quite correctly, Time had run an article pointing out
the advantages of the Internet from the perspective of publishers.
Time raised a big question, the same one Frank Daniels had asked.
Did publications really have to fork over such a hefty percentage of
their online revenue to commercial services, such as America Online,
when the Internet existed? Time Warner’s well-stocked area on the
Net was itself an answer of sorts. Granted, the company’s outpost
on America Online wasn’t about to vanish. Time Warner was testing
both interactive TV and computers as transmission vehicles; similarly
the company was not committing itself to any single network in
cyberspace. I took it for granted that sooner or later Time Warner
might end up on the network that Bill Gates was starting. Just as
Time reached newsstands everywhere, the electronic equivalent
could seek out eyes wherever the phone lines led. Sports Illustrated,
Fortune, and People would soon be on CompuServe. And yet Time
Warner’s priority in the computer world was clear: the Internet
above all else, at least for the moment.

“When we put Time on America Online,” said Walter Isaacson,
editor of new media at Time, “it is done on their server, using their
software, and only someone subscribing to America Online and using
America Online software can access it. On the Web, anyone using
public domain software can get to it.” I could just have substituted
“News&Observer” for “Time,” an impression only strengthened by
the next sentence: “We have a direct relationship to our readers.”
Isaacson went on: “There will be massive amounts more content
from Time Inc. on the Web than on America Online or CompuServe,
which will just feature individual magazines.”
Some twenty-two magazines were to go on the Web. Isaacson
said around ten editors would participate full or part time. Total
investment in the Web site was to reach the “mid six figures,” and
“with advertising it should be in the black within a year.” “There may
be a mix of ads and subscription fees,” Isaacson said. Mercifully, the
advertising would not be the intrusive Prodigy kind that popped up
on the bottom of my screen in a garish, Vegas style.
Jim Kinsella, the ex-newspaper editor who presided over the Web
area, said he was pushing for a subscription fee of around $8 a
month. I would have wanted the price to be a few dollars lower, but
it was fine if I got enough for my money. If nothing else, Kinsella
wanted readers to be able to stay online without the time charges
that made thousands unplug their hookups with America Online and
similar services. A product manager with Microsoft would later say as
much to the New York Times in discussing Bill Gates’ new service:
“We’re trying to reduce the threshold of pain. We think users hate
connect fees.”[4.18]
Kinsella’s $8 monthly fee—his proposed figure, not Time Warner’s
—would be for Pathfinder itself, not for the Internet connection. I did
some quick math. Pathfinder could indeed be a competitive
possibility if Time Warner were able to lower the cost of using the
Internet by way of cable television from the $75-$100 a month that
people typically paid for such arrangements.
Mass use might enable Time Warner to undercut the $20 that the
N&O presently charged. Typical readers might want to keep
reading a local newspaper, and the N&O could drop its own prices,

but this was still a good example of how national media just might
drain at least some readers away from the local media.
Understandably, Kinsella was thinking in mass, national terms, as I
would have done. He predicted that within five or ten years half the
country might be able to reach the Net in one way or another.
Others at Time were similarly optimistic.
Not everyone in late 1994 was so sanguine. Mark Stahlman, for
example, a media expert in New York, shrugged off Net publications
as “just the latest in a series of fads.” Richard M. Smith, Newsweek’s
editor in chief who was running the new-media committee of the
Magazine Publishers of America, was skeptical about online services
in general: “The people who are making money are the people who
are running conferences about it.”[4.19]
Smith was oversimplifying somewhat, but formidable barriers did
exist, of which one of the biggest happened to be the limits of the
technology. Reading electronic text for hours on end could be
murder on both the back and the eyes. All day long I sat in front of
a computer screen; the last thing I wanted was to have to do it
while I wandered through magazines or books. Television wouldn’t
do: I hated the idea of reading a magazine or novel from ten feet
away. Besides, didn’t magazines and books exist to be enjoyed in
bed, on the hammock, or at the beach?
Mightn’t Silicon Valley, however, come out with small, tablet-style
computers designed for reading? “TeleReaders” could feature
optional keyboards for people who wanted to use them as general
purpose computers. Screens, needless to say, must be much sharper
than today, and without so much flicker. Batteries should last longer.
And, ideally, you should be able to dart from place to place in a
newspaper or magazine by merely touching a “pen” to the
appropriate part of your screen. That was what the magazine,
newspaper, and book industries needed, rather than just more
conferences. Washington could even encourage this by way of a
focused procurement program for schools and libraries; the same
machines could even be used for electronic forms for government
and commerce.

Roger Fidler of Knight-Ridder had already been experimenting with
mockups of tablet-style machines. He was more interested in a
newspaper-oriented approach and less in a general one than I was.
But the basic idea was the same—words needn’t be captives of the
printed page. The real question was this: How soon until the right
technology appeared? Electronic magazines such as Time Warner’s
would still make money without a TeleRead-style approach, but the
full potential would not be reached, especially if more children
abandoned words for TV and computer images. That was even truer
for the world of books. Even more than magazines and newspapers,
e-books suffered from the limits of technology. It wasn’t just a
question of the right machine for viewing; at issue were other
matters such as copy protection and billing. But at least some partial
solutions were on the way, and even with the present difficulties of
the medium, online bookstores were sprouting up on the Internet.
One of the best was run by Laura Fillmore, an editor in
Massachusetts who had once worked for Little, Brown.
Books: Laura
Fillmore and
the Online
Bookstore
An elderly man owned a charming old store in a southern town
with the standard magnolias, wrought iron staircases, and hot, moist
summers, and he loved to brag about his shiny new safe. Most
customers did not know about it or care. Rather than worrying so
much about the protection of his wealth, he might have been better
off to imitate his rivals and invest his money in air-conditioning
instead of the safe.
The man reminded me of myopic publishers and authors. Not
quite grasping the full potential of the Internet, they fretted too

much about copyright protection, and not enough about making
their wares friendly to shoppers. A pay-per-read company in Virginia
was typical here. You could download its books off the Internet, but
you did not enjoy such niceties as links to other titles online. Nor
could you print more than a page or so at once. Beyond that, you
had to clutter up your computer system with a $25 gadget hooked
up to the printer port. If you were working on tight deadlines and
were rich and desperate enough, you might stomach this copy
protection system. But I dreaded the possibility of its adoption by
the book industry as a whole; established publishers and writers just
might see the world pass them by if they cared too much about
cybersafes and not enough about customer amenities. Many
megabytes of good, free reading awaited the public on the Web, and
not everyone understood the value that professional editors and
writers could add.
Nowadays, however, more publishers and hangers-on were
catching on to the nuances of the Net. Among them was Laura
Fillmore, a publishing consultant who owned the Online BookStore in
Rockport, Massachusetts. She must have driven some traditionalists
crazy. Fillmore actually had the notion that ASCII—text in a popular
format, without italics and the other trimmings—should be free to
everyone. She loved Project Gutenberg, which an Illinois academic
had started to put classics and other works on the Net at no charge.
Fillmore was the antithesis of a techno-geek, the kind of woman who
just might read Dickens to her two children on snowy days, and who
was a regular on the speaker circuit within her industry. She had
majored in English at Barnard College and worked for a publishing
company that dated back to the nineteenth century. Fillmore helped
bridge the past and the electronic era. Her vision wasn’t quite the
same as mine, but it was worlds apart from that of piracy-fixated
publishers who saw electronic readers as a criminal class.
The move to the Net was, in her opinion, part of a long evolution
toward a new form of decentralized publishing. She recalled when
the great houses didn’t farm out editing and other tasks as often as
they do today, and when almost every book took nine months to
reach the stores. “Back in the late ’70s when I was at Little, Brown,”

she said, “we needed to get special permission to use Ex. When an
author wanted his sales figures, I’d walk up the street to the top
floor of a separate building where Rose, the lady with the P&L
cards, had been keeping tabs for twenty years, and I’d sign out the
neatly penciled card and carefully carry it to my boss, wrapping it in
plastic against the weather if necessary. I passed the copyediting
department with their well-stocked reference library, a bastion
against inaccuracies, and the design department, smelling of wax,
hung with rulers, sizing wheels, and X-acto knives.”[4.20] The industry,
though, had changed; now freelancers throughout the country, not
just in New York or Boston, were often editing and even publishing
books. Fillmore herself had gone into freelance editorial work years
before, and she still remembered “the shrinking feeling in my
stomach the first time I bought a computer setup back in 1984:
$10,000 of the bank’s money for an XT and an HP LaserJet. The
salesman left, I was back at the C prompt, and the room grew dark.
No matter which buttons I pushed, ‘Abort, Retry, Ignore’ glared back
persistently. Finally, I chose none of the above and unplugged the
whole thing.”[4.21] Fillmore overcame her technophobia, but the chaos
of change still made her uncomfortable. “Increasing speed and
volume have led to high job turnover, a blurring of disciplines. Our
computerized tools allow the editor to become a typist, a designer,
and a type-setter, the designer becomes a software junkie, a graphic
artist, a prepress house. No time for galleys! Straight to pages! No
time for pages; straight to film. The drop dead date is bottom line.
Sales are needed this quarter.”[4.22]
Years ago, competition had reached the point where many
typesetting jobs left the United States. “We even hired freelancers
thirdhand in Singapore and Haiti,” Fillmore recalled in a speech. “The
publisher hired me; I hired someone stateside to hire someone in-
country to hire the keyboarder and, still, the publisher ended paying
maybe half what the job would have cost him at $15 per hour. Our
topic today is slavery.”[4.23]
But in Fillmore’s opinion, this distributed form of publishing, where
tasks went every which way, would take a newer and more humane
form. In the 1980s books had appeared on computer networking, a

kinder technology than the brutal, production-oriented variety of the
past. And now Fillmore saw in networks a chance to “elicit life from
people” who used computers to communicate. Her own “epiphany”
came when a Net-oriented writer, John Quarterman, author of The
Matrix, introduced her to “the then alien concept of electronic mail.
My assistant would pick up mail from my lone correspondent, the
author, print it out, put it in my in box, and I would handwrite
responses which she would input and send back in due time. It
sounds quaint, but it seemed to make sense to me at the time—in
the same way computerized typesetting distributed though
unconnected PCs made sense.” On the Net, everyone could publish,
not just giant publishing houses. And so Quarterman could forward
to her some public messages from students who were defying the
Chinese Army in Tiananmen Square. They could speak for
themselves; no one edited them. They weren’t like the freelance
typists in Haiti: They were not “hidden and voiceless behind four
middlemen” and “with no hope of a phone, much less an Internet
connection.”[4.24]
The overlap in Fillmore’s mind, between publishing and
communicating via the Net, was entirely natural. When the Haitians
typed, they created a digitized version of the book they were
working on. They were not just transferring words to paper. Bits and
bytes, once created, could go anywhere.
Fillmore, of course, was hardly the first to think of consolidating
knowledge. As early as 1945 a scientist had published a
preternaturally farsighted Atlantic Monthly article that was to
electronic publishing what Leonardo da Vinci’s notebooks were to
inventions in general. Vannevar Bush had proposed a memex, a
microfilm-based device that could bring together knowledge from
many disciplines—along with the thoughts of the user. It would be,
in other words, a cross between a personal file cabinet and a giant
library. In a speech, Fillmore quoted a key passage: “The human
mind... operates by association. With one item in its grasp, it snaps
instantly to the next that is suggested by the association of
thoughts, in accordance with some intricate web of trails covered by
the brain.”[4.25] Bush might as well have been describing the World

Wide Web and its links that allow you to click on “Boeing” and see
“Airplanes” or click on “Clinton” and see “Presidents.” Ted Nelson, a
dreamer-writer-programmer, was thinking of the memex when he
invented hypertext links. That concept, in turn, excited Tim Berners-
Lee, a staffer at a physics institute in Berne, Switzerland, who was
the father of the Web—the vast network of computers through
which I could retrieve the Raleigh News and Observer, Time, and
Fillmore’s offerings.
Back in 1992, however, the World Wide Web was a fraction of its
present size, and programmers had yet to release easy, graphically
oriented browsers such as Mosaic that would help tame the Web.
Even more than today, people needed books to fathom the Net. And
yet no popular-level guide was in print. So it was entirely fitting that
when Fillmore decided to create a book from scratch—rather than
just produce it for a publisher—the Internet was the subject. This
how-to guide was The Internet Companion, the author was Tracy
LaQuey, and the paper publisher was Addison-Wesley. Fillmore kept
the network rights and looked forward to distributing the book
through her new Online BookStore. Barry Shein of Software Tool &
Die, the first commercial service to hook ordinary mortals into the
Internet, had offered her space on his bank of hard disks. “He
described his operation,” she said, “as basically an electronic store
with empty shelves and a cash register at the door. I decided that I’d
find electronic properties to fill these shelves.”[4.26] But the Internet
at the time had Acceptable Use Policies that prevented her from
making a profit. What to do?
Fillmore hit on a solution that actually rewarded her for an
idealistic approach to publishing. She gave away—with great luck in
the end—ASCII files from the book in hopes of drumming up interest
in the paper version. “Who wants to read hundreds of pages in
ASCII anyway?” Fillmore would later ask. Unadorned ASCII by itself
wasn’t always that pleasant to read, and many people liked the Net
version well enough to shell out money for a paper book. “Even our
publisher was supportive of our effort,” Fillmore said, “and happy
with the resulting sales figures.”[4.27] Orders poured in from as far off
as Finland and Korea. Netfolks all over the world could learn of

Fillmore’s offering immediately rather than waiting for reviews to
show up in local magazines and newspapers.
Within two years, Companion had sold hundreds of thousands of
copies. Al Gore had written the foreword just before his election as
vice president, but the freebies on the Net certainly hadn’t hurt.
Other publishers also found that free copies could be a boon, not a
bane. Zen and the Art of the Internet (Prentice Hall) and The
Hacker’s Dictionary (MIT Press) similarly flew off the racks. “Giving
something valuable away for free,” Fillmore said, “can make
money.”[4.28]
Of course some would say she hadn’t actually published online.
Rather she had used the medium to promote a paper book. Still, the
prospect of purely electronic publishing beckoned. “I was seduced by
the prospect of the then 10 million people on the Internet—10
million literate people with disposable incomes—attached to the Net.
Why not acquire lots of Internet rights to lots of books and put them
online at the Online BookStore. Surely some percentage of those
people would buy files of a popular author’s books for a reasonable
price.”[4.29] Fillmore was sensible enough to price her offerings for
consumers who were spending their own money, not their bosses’.
Some commercial databases were charging as much as $200 per
hour or more, while Fillmore was thinking more in terms of $5, say,
for a short story downloaded from the Net.
The test story was “Umney’s Last Case,” a fifty-page Stephen King
story from a collection called Nightmares and Dreamscapes. King
was among the best-selling writers on the planet. Fillmore dreamed
of tens of thousands of dialups even if “Umney” intrigued only 1
percent of the 10 million people on the Net at the time. Fillmore had
picked out just the right King story, one where a time traveler gave a
Toshiba T-1000 laptop computer to a tough detective around 1939—
someone who in turn used his “plastic Buck Rogers steno machine”
to write a story within King’s own tale.
Fillmore’s “Umney” project was a sensation at the biggest book
fair in the world, the one at Frankfurt; upbeat stories appeared in
places ranging from European news programs to the Wall Street
Journal. She witnessed “a vast amount of smoke, a tremendous

marketing boost for the printed book again, lots of noise—and by
extension, lots of profit for the publisher and for the author—but
handfuls of per-copy sales.”[4.30] They didn’t even pay for all the
phone calls used to set up the deal.
I was hardly surprised. Enjoying access to many megs of free
material on the Net, the typical denizen didn’t want to shell out even
$5 for the story even if she or he could simply fax in a credit card
number. It wasn’t that King’s work was worthless—quite the
opposite. Rather, on the Internet and with this business model,
“Umney” at most any realistic price could not compete with free
material such as Usenet postings.
Yes, the Net teemed with sci-fi and fantasy fans. But as I saw it,
they were too busy talking to each other, and, while they would have
been delighted to download “Umney” for free, they balked at
spending the $5. You might say that “Umney” was like a typical TV
program. The appeal was potentially broad but not deep. Pay-per-
view wasn’t that much of a hit on cable TV, and the same principle
applied here. “Umney” could enhance a collection of material for
subscribers—we go back to the flat-fee example of the News &
Observer and Jim Kinsella’s vision for Time Warner—but even a
Stephen King story wasn’t strong enough on its own for online use.
Part of the problem, I believed, was the medium. The right
technology for reading fifty-page short stories just wasn’t out there
yet. With the proper equipment, the value would increase.
Besides, even now, Fillmore could use a license or sponsorship
model. She sold “Umney” to two computer networks, one of them
CompuServe, which gained the right to post the story for a week
during a conference on paperless publishing. “Hundreds of people
have accessed it,” Fillmore said. The future possibilities were evident
now. Corporations someday might sponsor books on computer
networks the way they sponsored programs on CBS or NBC. In fact,
whole sites on the Net—with the names of companies—could serve
as homes for innovative projects. Sun Microsystems was oriented
toward UNIX, relied heavily on sales to Net users, and benefited
from the goodwill and publicity that its SunSite libraries enjoyed.
Fare ranged from presidential speeches to the Internet Underground

Music Archive; there could be a place for commercial e-books as well
in these high-tech sandboxes, as Fillmore jokingly called such areas.
The sponsorship model wasn’t perfect, of course. Fillmore herself
was the first to wonder which corporations would have sponsored
writings about the uprising in Tiananmen Square. Big companies
often favored upbeat material. As I saw it, fiction and nonfiction
books alike might suffer if this model alone prevailed. They differed
from newspapers and magazines; book publishers thought more in
terms of individual properties, and beyond that, publications such as
the N&O and Time already enjoyed strong identities from their
paper incarnations. The new media were less a challenge to their
editorial integrity. But many sponsored books might degenerate into
the Net equivalent of the wretched infomercials on TV, the ones
where over-the-hill actors “interviewed” astrologers or memory
experts, and where the audiences clapped thunderously on cue.
Wisely, Fillmore did not give up on “Umney” entirely—it was still
online when I was writing this chapter—nor did she quit using the
Net to promote writings on paper. Even more important, she tried
out writings that took advantage of links to other material on the
Web.
Bless This Food: Amazing Grace in Praise of Food was an example
of prime material for hypertext. The paper book bought together
food-related prayers from many times and places. But everything
was contained. You couldn’t wander outside the printed pages.
Thanks to Fillmore, however, you could click on Buddhist-related
material and see a Buddha’s image piped in from the Smithsonian.
You could even e-mail the author of Bless, Adrian Butash. Fillmore
wasn’t just selling the book itself—she was offering it as a
“dashboard” that could take you to related material on the Net.
Certainly the Smithsonian hadn’t had Bless in mind when it posted
the picture of Buddha. However, through the pointers in the
electronic edition, you could learn of this image and view it in just
the right context; that, after all, was the splendor of the Web. Quite
honestly, then, Fillmore could charge $25 for a book that sold in
hardback from Delacorte for $18.95. She was giving you more for
your money. Besides, if you proposed new links and she liked them,

you would receive some royalties. You, the reader, could be part of
the book and the author’s life. We could all be editors.
As a writer, I had somewhat mixed feelings about this. I loved e-
mail from readers. But I was already spending too many hours a day
on electronic correspondence of one kind or another. I hated the
idea of suffering a constant stream of e-mail from Project X when I
wanted to move on to Project Y. If this model won out, writers would
have to be much choosier about the projects they took on—knowing
that publishers expected more commitment.
Given the deluge of 50,000 titles a year that readers face just
from U. S. publishers, more than a few people would enjoy such a
prospect. But they shouldn’t grow too complacent. With electronic
publishing much cheaper than the paper variety, we might eventually
see 100,000 commercially published titles a year. I, for one, wouldn’t
mind as long as quality and royalties don’t suffer. The problem is not
too many books, but rather the need for better software to sort
through them—or for more hypertext editors to issue good pointers.
That is one reason why I loved the idea of publishers selling pointers
as well as actual material.
Not every writer would be open-minded, of course; even Fillmore
at first had feared hypertext. When O’Reilly and Associates put one
of her papers on the Web through GNN—spreading around her
observations on electronic publishing—she saw all kinds of links. By
clicking on blue letters, for example, readers would call up material
about a founder of Internet. Fillmore felt as if a Philistine had taken
her beautiful bowl, her self-contained piece of writing, and turned it
into a colander. Some writers might see a parallel in another way:
Suppose the colander leaked readers, who, seeing the links, dove off
into another area of the Net, and never returned. Fillmore had
adjusted to this possibility, and I could, too. Just like Zonker Harris I
was of the “May the best server win!” mentality, except that I
refused to confuse popularity with merit. Books weren’t like sports
servers.
From society’s viewpoint, another issue presented itself here. Both
Fillmore and I wondered about the damage that television and
computers might be doing to people’s attention spans. “Attention

deficit disorder seems to have arisen at the same time that
computers have spread to the home and office,” she said, “and I
don’t think that’s an accident. How many people age twelve and
younger are capable of reading 300 pages of sustained argument
about anything?” Another worry arose, too, in my mind. Like Frank
Daniels, I realized that an entire generation of children was spending
more time gazing at computer and TV screens than they devoted to
books and traditional newspapers.
I felt that technology was destiny, that Washington and other
governments should promote computers that encouraged the
receptive to read e-books hour after hour. Too much of the new-style
education, as envisioned by many, would be task oriented—would be
training as much as education per se. That was fine for technical
matters where, for example, a future factory worker might want to
learn the basics of engine design. Hypertext was superb. The
student could study a diagram of a diesel engine, click on an
individual part, and read and hear a detailed explanation of its
function. But I wanted technology that also encouraged people to
read and absorb whole books.
If book readers were too small a minority, then countries such as
the United States would be less democratic and more oligarchic, with
the elite all too able to manipulate the other citizens. Some social
critics such as Neil Postman demonized technology as a source of
mindless distractions for the masses. I, however, saw opportunity if
we acted soon enough before we lost more children to TV. That
meant sharp screens, smaller, lighter machines, and other advances
—which would come sooner or later, but which could be hastened by
the coming of a focused procurement program. Washington should
assure the Valley a market for the right hardware. It should also try
harder to help schools absorb it, so the machines wouldn’t just sit
idle in closets.
A national digital library, not just a digital store leading to
commercial collections, was just as essential as better hardware.
Today a college student researching the effect of Shakespeare on
popular culture is able to find the Bard’s work at the school library.
But what about tracking down newer books that the library couldn’t

afford to buy? Also, only one student could read a paper copy at a
time; suppose a professor wanted many students to compare
impressions of a novel, especially one that was out of print and long
gone from the bookstores? People on the technical side could benefit
even more than those in the humanities. The best and most recent
guides to Microsoft Word or Windows, for example, didn’t come from
educators; rather they came from the private sector. The faster this
knowledge could reach average citizens, the easier it would be to
upgrade the labor force.
A national digital library, moreover, would help many businesses
market their goods. A food company trying to sell a new line of rice,
for example, could instantly call up cookbooks of many ethnic groups
and find out the relationship between food and the cultures. In an
era of customized products, companies needed to learn quickly
about niche markets. That would be especially true as business
globalized; corporate planners had to keep on top of conditions in
many countries.
So TeleRead-style libraries—which let people look through many
kinds of information, everything from books to UN reports—could
make real contributions in the United States and elsewhere. If
nothing else, governments needed to understand the possible
efficiencies. Yes, public and academic librarians would choose books.
But innovative, private firms would own the computer banks (well
backed up) storing the books and other material; many different
contractors, always trying to outdo each other’s technologies, could
compete. Other efficiencies would accrue. Pooling the public libraries
of rich and poor citizens would help everyone by increasing the
variety of books available to all.
Big Brother needn’t run a national digital library. Subject-oriented
librarians in many cities might acquire material; in effect they would
be putting a public library system online, one that reflected the
tastes of, say, Lyons as well as Paris. How much more supple than
the overcentralized approach that the French now favored for their
national library! The elite librarians could still identify the books they
had blessed, but the provincials could have their say as well; and,

given the variability of literary tastes over the ages, the latter in
some cases might prevail anyway.
What’s more, by gambling money up front to qualify for royalties
from TeleRead, writers and commercial publishers could bypass the
librarians. Book people such as Laura Fillmore could thrive under this
approach. A national library could offer e-books not only to citizens
directly but also to independent-minded entrepreneurs such as
Fillmore, who could charge for their custom links. I loved the
idealism she showed in suggesting that ASCII be free. It was a good
model in many cases for today. But I feared that as computers grew
better for book reading—and it would happen eventually, with or
without a TeleRead program—free ASCII would take away too many
paying customers. And if ASCII books weren’t free? Then, more than
ever, piracy would occur regardless of various legal and technological
precautions. So the answer should be free national digital libraries—
well stocked and with fair pay for writers and publishers—to reduce
the temptation to bypass copy protection. Use tracking to report
dialup counts and pay originators of material, but not for billing.
That was the way to take full advantage of the technology and keep
market incentives while promoting literacy.
Rich countries would be the first to start libraries of this kind. They
could safeguard their intellectual property by helping poorer
countries get books online if the latter agreed to honor copyright
laws. The time would come for national and international Electronic
Peace Corps to make this possible. EPCs could help upgrade Third
World phone systems on site and share knowledge via e-books, e -
mail, two-way video, and otherwise. To enforce global copyright law,
we needed carrots as well as sticks.
What’s more, governments could protect books with technology
far less cumbersome than the $ 25 gadgets that the pay-per-read
bookstore in Virginia used. Then e-text stood a chance. I thought of
the old merchant down South: Safes were useful, but only if the
customers could enjoy an air-conditioner—an easy-to-use digital
library for all of a country’s citizens.
National digital libraries, of course, could link up with each other
and form an official world library someday. But, given the many

cultural differences, that was impossible now. National libraries,
then, were the way to go—with opportunities for citizens in different
countries to read each other’s books when governments allowed
this. I pitied the censors. In an era of international computer
networks, national libraries would end up anyway as one big global
library for citizens of open societies and for the more resourceful
people of countries such as Iran. Simply put, national digital libraries
would make it so much easier to market or shop for books
internationally. When a Swedish anarchist heard about TeleRead, his
big question wasn’t, “Isn’t this an opportunity for cultural
imperialism?” Instead it was, “Will I be able to read American best-
sellers as quickly as people there can?” Whatever the kind of book—
a Tom Clancy thriller or an anarchistic tract—TeleRead libraries would
allow easy global distribution.
In rich countries such as the United States and Sweden, the need
for national digital libraries would only grow with the introduction of
better televisions and video games, not to mention the distractions
of the Net itself—including virtual reality, at some point. Even in
wealthy nations, people had only so much disposable income. How
much of it would be left for online books? Mightn’t we use e-forms
and digital libraries to transfer resources from paperwork to
knowledge? As much as I applauded the good work that Frank
Daniels was doing with the third graders in Raleigh, I was a little put
off by the online questionnaire for adults and children using his BBS.
It asked about favorite TV programs, physical appearance, sports,
and other activities, but a simple question was missing—one that I
felt certain would have been on the list twenty years ago: “What are
your favorite books?”

Spring 1995: An
(Interim) Afterword
Whatever the medium—newspapers, books, or magazines—many
Netfolks saw the Internet as a path to diversity. That was partly why
I liked seeing The News&Observer online with A. C. Snow et al.
Maybe the Internet could rescue locally owned newspapers before
they all tumbled down the maws of conglomerates. On May 17,
1995, however, The NandO Times, the Webbed newspaper of the N
& O, ran a story that I’d never wanted to read. A chain was buying
up the company. For perhaps the first time, a Net daily reported on
the sale of it and its pulped-wood siblings.
A color photo showed Frank Daniels III briefing his staff. What
really caught my eye, however, was a revelation that I saw later in
the New York Times: “Frank Daniels III said he was convinced that
the paper needed to find a larger parent in part to give the paper
the resources necessary to nurture those new electronic efforts.”
More than a few of us newspaper junkies had hoped that the new
technology would help keep the N&O local. I recalled one reason
why Daniels had not dumped his N&O stock in the 1980s in favor
of an investment in an online service. “The relationship between a
newspaper and a community,” he had said, “has such a richness and
history that communities shouldn’t lose that.” Now, however, after
101 years in the Daniels family, the N&O and trimmings were going
to a California chain for $373 million. The buyer was McClatchy
Newspapers Inc., the former employer of George Schlukbier, the
Daniels’s new-media guru.
No wicked corporate conspiracies existed here. The Danielses
simply felt comfortable with McClatchy, which not only shared the N
& O’s still basically liberal politics but also enjoyed a good reputation
in the newspaper business.

Run out of Sacramento, McClatchy Newspapers was a family -
owned chain with just twelve dailies. It allowed much more leeway
to local editors than many others did, and I might well have reacted
just as the Daniels family did when the McClatchy people came
calling. The N&O mustn’t end up in the hands of some skinflint
chain; McClatchy Newspapers could be an excellent alternative.
Still, the sale did not delight me. The Net, after all, was supposed
to be good for small guys, including, presumably, family-owned
enterprises. Josephus Daniels had bought the N&O at that
bankruptcy auction in 1894, seen it through the Roaring Twenties,
the stockmarket crash, and the heyday of his friend FDR. He must
have died thinking that the Daniels name would forever grace the
masthead. From a portrait in the boardroom, he looked out at his
progeny announcing the transaction. Just why couldn’t all the
computers and cables and videocams have helped strengthen the
family business, not force its sale?
I could see how the latter may have happened. The Daniels had
had to invest in both the printing press and the new media, with an
emphasis on the plural. A story on newsprint, an Internet audio, and
a video would cost more than just an old-fashioned version.
Network-related expenses of the N&O may have been smaller than
the investment in new press, but they would only grow in the future.
No-frills Web areas cost next to nothing to set up. But net. papers
with the very flashiest graphics and full-motion video would need
programmers and designers and other specialists, not all of them
cheap. At the same time the Daniels wanted to cover their
circulation area well, and that meant a big, expensive staff of
reporters, too.
Just as important, however, the N&O faced strong competition
for advertisers and readers. Yes, the Net shrank distances and gave
smaller companies some new marketing opportunities. But as shown
by Time Warner’s giant electronic newsstand, it could also create
some good synergies for media conglomerates offering package
deals to national advertisers. In certain respects—hardly all—readers
also benefited. I could key in “Carly Simon, ” for example, and see
any stories that might have appeared about her, not only in Time but

also in Entertainment Weekly or People. Frank Daniels could bring
together wire service news and offbeat items from technical
publications and others. But in the future he couldn’t match the
brand appeal of corporations such as Time Warner.
Daniels had a right to be proud of his technological
accomplishments, of course. But from now on, assuming that he
stayed, as he apparently would for the moment, he would be an
employee rather than a member of the owning family. Forget the
Third Wave talk of Net saving us all from conglomerates. We could
all have our own home pages on the World Wide Web, of course,
and maybe put out little magazines; and IUMA-style startups could
always use the new technology to startle the Goliaths—and in the
end, exceptions notwithstanding, the Internet did foster diversity.
Clearly, though, it was far from an all-purpose savior for the N&Os
of the world. However powerful in North Carolina, the Raleigh
newspaper was hardly on an equal footing when it competed against
the very largest media organizations.
As if to underscore that point, eight huge newspaper publishers
had banded together earlier that spring to form New Century
Network, a club for the big boys on the Net. Some people wondered
if the giants might lose out in the end—readers wanted to tour the
Web themselves, not just confine themselves to material favored by
newspaper coalitions. And maybe New Century wouldn’t end up so
exclusive after all. Also, advertisers might prefer to sprinkle their
cash around the Web rather than focus it on newspaper chains—
they could pay for links to their pages from many sites without much
ado. The natural economies of the Net might yet win out over the
business plans of the giants. Still, for the moment, publishers such
as Gannett and the Washington Post Company were apparently
setting the tone of New Century itself. The 185 New Century papers
claimed more than 23 million paying readers.
“New Century might raise antitrust questions,” wrote Rory
O’Connor, a reporter for the San Jose Mercury News, part of Knight-
Ridder, a chain in New Century. Peter Winter, interim chief executive
of New Century, said the publishers were “comfortable with our
conformance to antitrust statutes.”[4.31]

Antitrust was the talk of the newspaper and online industries. In
early June the U. S. Justice Department said it was studying the
network that Microsoft aimed to launch in August. Just by clicking on
the proper icon available through the Windows 95 operating system,
people could join the Microsoft Network. And some newspapers and
other online services feared that Microsoft could stifle the
competition. In a year Windows might sell 20-40 million copies; what
if several million users clicked?
Newspapers worried increasingly about the Microsoft Network and
other online services. American Opinion Research of Princeton, N. J.,
found that almost a fifth of the surveyed editors and publishers
thought they might lose more advertising to online services than to
television. Nearly three-quarters said the business was in good
shape now. Just a half felt the same would be true by the year 2005.
[4.32]
The newspaper chains tried to fight back. Large papers now
owned 11 percent of the shares in Netscape Communications, the
wizards behind the fastest and best browser on the Web. For the
moment things seemed fine for the public. Netscape came up with
new wrinkles that other companies didn’t offer, such as the ability for
Web pages to sprout color backgrounds without much fuss. But so
far it was working with standards-setting bodies rather than saying,
“Hey, you guys, these features will be mine alone.” I just hoped that
in the future Netscape wouldn’t fashion its software to bind people
to specific sources of news from conglomerates such as Knight-
Ridder. Perhaps half the people cruising the Web were now using
Netscape.
In a buying spree of its own, America Online purchased Internet
fixtures such as WAIS Inc., the software company. WAIS had made
some of the best publishing tools on the Net. America Online also
bought the WebCrawler, a first-rate index to the Web. The company
acquired Global Net Navigator, too, the wonderfully Netcentric
magazine from O’Reilly and Associates, a guardian of Net culture.
Just like Frank Daniels III, Tim O’Reilly alluded to the cost of online
services. Explaining the sale, he told a GNN mailing list that “in order
to really do justice to the information problem GNN was created to

solve, GNN would have to be scaled up beyond our ability to fund it
on our own. With many large players entering the Internet
information services market, the best way to keep our lead was to
team up with one of them.”
The most dramatic—and, some critics might say, ominous—
alliance may have happened when MCI teamed up with Rupert
Murdoch to form a new partnership that could offer many kinds of
material on the Net. It committed as much as $2 billion toward his
News Corporation.
MCI wasn’t just eager to be a pipeline for publishers and others—
it wanted to Originate Content. The phone company was already
publishing readers’ short stories electronically by way of Gramercy
Press. Soon it would release a trade paperback—yes, a book on
pulped wood—from a novelist writing under the name of a fictitious
Gramercy author. But the Murdoch alliance meant so much more.
This global entrepreneur controlled Harper-Collins through News
Corps. Would his electronic books enjoy global distribution
advantages via MCI’s pipelines, compared to offerings from smaller,
less connected publishers?
Within the book business itself, the movement toward the Net was
accelerating as summer 1995 neared. More and more authors were
online, getting feedback from fans—just as the fledgling rockers of
IUMA did. It was a great morale booster, but only to a point. The
novelist Nicholson Baker, author of the New Yorker article on
electronic library catalogues, complained that e-mail had “the
problem of promptitude. You have to answer within four days or
you’re being rude. I like the stateliness of paper, where you can take
six months. You’re still being unforgivably rude, but somehow it’s
okay because other people have been rude in this way before.”[4.33]
Obscure writers, however, found the fan mail from the Internet to be
more helpful. In that way the Net was a friend of diversity.
Smaller publishers were also growing more comfortable with the
Internet. Bookport, a California-based service, let them post their
books on the World Wide Web for Netfolks to read page by page.
Alas, a customer could not obtain a whole e-book at once. The idea,
of course, was to discourage piracy. I disliked the idea of pay-per-

read prevailing; the library model would make books much more
popular among the young and actually help good publishers. But the
Bookport was well done with oodles of great links to book-related
sites on the Web. One of the first titles was Netiquette, a guide to
manners on the Internet; that was in the community-minded spirit of
the traditional Net.
Larger publishers, too, pushed ahead on the Web. Time Warner
was selling “Quick Reads.” It was a series of reference books, self-
help guides, and others that you could download in full and search
for, say, the right quote from a famous business executive (Bartlett’s
Book of Business Quotations) or the appropriate recipe (the Cooking
Library). I could understand Time Warner’s fondness here for
reference books. Most readers didn’t want to gawk at electronic
novels hour after hour. The big question, in cases of tech-savvy
conglomerates like Time Warner, was not whether the publishers
were ready. It was whether the public was; whether enough people
would end up soon enough with the proper hardware for reading
books in bed or on the sofa.
That, of course, was where TeleRead came in. Whatever their
sizes, publishers needed to hook the nonelite in this videocentric era
before they gave up on the written word.
The above is not to suggest that text is the only way to
communicate knowledge over the Net. The right graphics certainly
can as well. One of the most intriguing examples of the potential
here is a remarkable endeavor—the Visible Human Project—in
which, so to speak, a murder lives on forever in cyberspace to the
benefit of medical education and cancer research. I’ll discuss this in
the next chapter.

CHAPTER
FIVE
Wired Knowledge:
When They Let a
Murderer Loose
on the Internet
Paul Jernigan was a tattooed ex-mechanic just under six feet tall and
weighing 200 pounds. He had been a drug addict and a chronic
drunk, but nearly all his organs still looked in textbook shape by the
standards of gross anatomy—a stroke of luck that would later help
him win him a macabre competition. Jernigan had fatally stabbed
and shot a seventy-five-year-old watchman after stealing a radio and
a microwave oven. More than a decade had passed. So had his
hopes for a successful appeal to the courts.
Lying on a gurney in a Texas deathhouse—his arms outstretched,
as if in a crucifixion—Paul Jernigan just gawked upward as his
brother watched. No last words came before the poison flowed into
Jernigan’s veins.
Jernigan gave himself to science. A not-so-loquacious sister told
me this was to spare the family the cost of burial. “It was like,
matter of fact,” his last attorney said of the donation. “It was a gift.
He wasn’t going to laud himself, pat himself on the back. We didn’t
send an embossed announcement that ‘Paul Jernigan has donated
his body to science and this is his ticket to redemption.’”[5.1] A former
cellmate offered his own twist. Supposedly, Jernigan wanted his
family to be able to sell his life story for a true-crime book. The

donation just might make the planet care more about him in death
than in life.
Within a year of the execution, in fact, I was reading clips about
Paul Jernigan from the London Times, Jerusalem Post, New York
Times, Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, and the Boston Globe.
My favorite lead came out in a British paper called The Independent:
“A killer was yesterday let loose on the Internet computer network.”
I wondered how he’d respond to flaming. The new Jernigan lived on
as a digital atlas of the human body, a few steaklike cross sections of
which I could dial up on the World Wide Web.
The Visible Human Project had come out of the National Library of
Medicine in a Maryland suburb near Washington, D. C. It was one of
the most spectacular examples of the Net’s potential for spreading
knowledge, the topic of this chapter.
Researchers had cut Jernigan into four blocks, frozen him in a blue
gel, ground him down millimeter by millimeter, digitally
photographed the 1,878 cross sections that emerged, scanned these
slices[5.2] into a computer, put them on magnetic tape, and then on
the Internet. Now the cadaver would be grist for medical educators
and cancer researchers and perhaps even the designers of a
“Fantastic Voyage”-style game. Players might explore the human
body from the inside, just as Isaac Asimov’s characters did in his
novel. The government itself was spending $1.4 million on the
project; expected commercial payoffs could reach the tens of
millions and maybe more. Research and education, however, would
be paramount here.
The Visible Human Project is but one of thousands of uses that
academics and researchers have found for the Internet. The Net is
why many scientific luminaries were quick to slap the “fraud” label
on efforts to create energy through cold fusion. Skeptics throughout
the world could compare notes. If Paris couldn’t replicate an
experiment, then Boston would know within hours. Working in the
other direction, fusion stalwarts have used the Internet to swap data
and maintain the faith. Cyberspace is to knowledge what beehives
are to honey.

Already the Net teems with thousands of mailing lists devoted to
the most arcane disciplines, not just to the mainstream ones. Many
scientists and other researchers envision the Net as a substitute for
paper-style academic journals, subscriptions to some of which can
cost as much as a Ford Escort. Stevan Harnad has caught the
imaginations of many academics with “A Subversive Proposal” for
scholars to publish their finished works formally on the Net without
offering them to academic publishers. He puts out a vigilantly edited,
psychology-related magazine with a circulation of tens of thousand
on the Internet; he sees no reason for the Net just to be a
repository for pre-publication papers. In his opinion, academics could
use such opportunities to enjoy greater bargaining power with
existing publishers.
Yet another glory of the Internet is that it serves as a bridge
between experts and nonexperts, as well as one between authorities
in many academic disciplines. A dean of a law school, for example,
can sign up for mailing lists on electronic serials to learn more about
the technology that is fueling the drive for copyright reform.
From Day One, the Internet was a creature of the elite research
establishment, but knowledge-related uses have steadily grown
more egalitarian—starting with the brightest students in elementary
and high schools, then moving on to average children, and even to
problem kids.
To dispose of a major issue, No, the Net shouldn’t replace
teachers. I couldn’t agree more with Cliff Stoll when he rants against
lax standards and mindless technocratic schemes. Well-trained
teachers can provide inspiration and guidance to help children
explore networks on their own. The last thing we need is to turn the
educational reaches of the Net into one big flash card. What the Net
can do is prepare children to deal with source material, with actual
papers written by researchers, as opposed to pabulum in textbooks.
Correctly, Stoll criticizes some educators for teaching astronomy
without children studying the actual sky; computer programs should
only supplement such activities, not replace them. But shouldn’t he
apply the same “real thing” logic to Web-distributed source material
and applaud students’ easier access to it? Only the brightest children

will benefit from a complicated mathematical treatise. But surely
even an average student could take advantage of a historian’s paper
on a nearby Civil War battle. If anything, teachers could use the Web
and other areas of the Net to demand more research from students.
Just why must Stoll compare the Net to a fun but dumb educational
film? Is a Web version of the Odyssey to be confused with some
educational Looney Tunes?
Intriguingly, Web technology makes it possible for students to
produce information, not just soak it up. In Fairfax County, Virginia,
students at Thomas Jefferson, a high school for the gifted, are
posting their “pages” on the World Wide Web. I can remember when
college applicants submitted tape recordings of their music. Now
they can also give M. I. T. or Caltech the addresses of their Web
pages and demonstrate, in the most direct way, their familiarity with
networking. They can post their papers and point to other people’s
pages that interest them.
Also, at Jefferson and countless other schools, students can
electronically send their classmates to knowledge-rich sites on the
Web. Clicking on “NASA” in blue letters within Bob’s area, Jill can see
what the space program is doing. Then she can return, click on
other blue letters, and check out his tip to visit a history-related site
discussing the Sputnik and Vanguard days. Via a project called
MendelWeb, Ellen can read the famous treatise of Gregor Mendel,
the geneticist, and retrieve other scientists’ opinions; then she might
write her own paper and post it on the Web for classmates and even
for students elsewhere.
Clearly the value of the Net, for students and researchers alike,
isn’t just in the information per se—it’s also in the ease of sharing it.
Teachers can point to common Web resources (such as MendelWeb)
from Web pages where they add their own comment, or even their
own study guides. They can also link to other guides.
Some Web sites even offer electronic forms with questions to
which students can respond—in either a multiple choice or an essay
format. Andy Carvin, a specialist in educational technology with the
Corporation for Public Broadcasting, praises the World Wide Web as
“an excellent tool in which to design online curricula.”

Understandably, even elementary schools are getting on the Web
with their own areas.
Other good things are happening. By way of a project called Big
Sky Telegraph, Native Americans in Montana have been pen pals
with children in the former Soviet Union. What better way to stir up
an interest in writing, politics, and geography at the same time?
Significantly, in Montana and other places, many schools are not on
the Net directly. Instead, schools use affordable bulletin board
systems—their own or perhaps those operated by hobbyists—which
can relay Net-originated material. If need be, such systems can run
on ancient computers of the kind found at garage sales; some
messages may be delayed for days, but that’s better than no
connection at all. Within the BBS world, moreover, nets even exist
especially for education. Consider K12Net, which includes at least
“three dozen conferences specifically related to K-12 curriculum” and
reaches some sixty school-associated systems in New Zealand alone.
More and more, however, lucky schools are hooking into the Internet
directly or at least arranging for teachers and students to get
accounts elsewhere.
As a ninth grader at Poolesville Middle Senior High School, in
Poolesville, Maryland, Chris Gazunis used the Net to study
catastrophes such as earthquakes, hurricanes, and oil spills. “We
didn’t just look at a textbook diagram of what caused an earthquake
and the casualty number associated with it,” he recalled. “We used
the networks to learn what happened to the people’s lives and
homes. Instead of just being given a set of directions and material
that would result in an earthquake resistant building, we designed
and tested them ourselves.”[5.3]
Randy Hammer, a high schooler at Timberline High School in
Lacey, Washington, who is blind “with two glass eyes,” once had to
have sighted people read the newspaper to him. No longer. Via
network connections, he can enjoy the Washington Post, the
Moscow News, and science-oriented publications—thanks to a
gadget that reads aloud to him the words on his screen. “It’s hard
now,” he wrote, “to remember how I lived without this wealth of

materials and information at my fingertips.”[5.4] That’s what happens
when the hardware is around.
Even in a wealthy place like the United States, however, society so
far has been stingy toward high tech in public schools. The ratio
between students and computers is something like 16 to 1. Some 75
percent of American schools have computers capable of getting on
the Net, but the children can’t all use them at once. What’s more,
just 35 percent of public schools have Internet hookups in
classrooms, media centers, or computer labs. Only 3 percent of the
classrooms themselves are wired in, according to a survey from the
U. S. Department of Education.
We’re talking almost Third World here. “It’s amazing to me how
people outside of education have no idea how teachers still have to
line up outside the teachers’ lounge to use the telephone,” says a
senior analyst at the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment.
[5.5]
In the end, as I see it, the real solution is a TeleRead-style
program of the kind described in the previous chapter. It would
connect the students to the nets from home, reduce the future
communications costs of the schools somewhat, and allow students
to explore computer networks at leisure rather than just during the
school day. A few small steps are already being taken in this general
direction. The state of Maryland has granted limited—but free—
Internet privileges to school children and other residents. Without
leaving home, they can dial up material ranging from weather
reports, to academic papers, to Shakespearean poetry. Joseph
Peightel, a cable splicer with Bell Atlantic, says that the Sailor
program is just the ticket for his ten-year-old daughter, whose
hunger for books outstrips the family budget. While the Peightels
can’t retrieve the latest best-sellers, they at least can enjoy Project
Gutenberg-style material in the public domain. The Maryland
program helping the Peightels is not TeleRead, and it comes with
problems and inefficiencies, but it may be as close as any state
effort to the nirvana envisioned by Al Gore, in which all children
could dial up the Library of Congress.

Needless to say, I bristle when Cliff Stoll glosses over the reasons
why the Net can’t provide easy answers to questions such as “What
political compromises caused Bismarck to become the capital of
North Dakota?” or “Why isn’t Kyoto the capital of today’s Japan?” or
“What’s the history of the Ruhr Valley, and what are the implications
of its new Eastern European competition?” Of course. Worried about
piracy, publishers have understandably kept their textbooks off the
Net. The last laugh, however, just may be on the more zealous of
the copyright interests. Right now Stoll couldn’t be more correct
about the need for more and better books on the Net; but as shown
by, say, MendelWeb, the academic community is doing plenty on its
own. And if this keeps up, the demand for copyrighted, commercial
books, the kind that feed me, my editors, and yes, my publishers,
too, could suffer. Far better to have a national digital library with
privately originated books available from the very start.
Ahead I’ll examine more closely some scientific and educational
uses of the Net. Selections—yes, the print kind, not the Jernigan
variety—will appear on:
 The “hows,” the positives, and the negatives of the Visible Human
Project—it stands out for reasons beyond the drama. The Clinton
administration has encouraged high-bandwidth, scientific users of
the Net. The original Visible Man requires sixteen gigabytes of
storage—enough space to hold fifty Encyclopaedia Britannicas.
Some say this isn’t the best use of Net resources. I disagree,
however, and I’ll tell why. Along the way I’ll pass on information
about the Internet’s Visible Man before he became so visible.
 High school use of the Internet. The United States is hardly the
only nation with thousands of children in cyberspace—countries
ranging from Canada to Singapore are putting students online,
directly or indirectly. Significantly, computers and networks can
help students outside the elite. Some proof of this comes from
Nova Scotia, where, for several years, a high school has been
using the Internet to benefit some “at-risk” students. I’ll tell you
about the Internet success that a Canadian teacher named Jeff
Doran has enjoyed with leather-jacketed teenagers. Many are
racing into the computer lab and, let’s hope, away from fates such

as Paul Jernigan’s. The Internet project at Park View Education
Centre is far from an unqualified triumph—many Park View
teachers still fear the technology—but patterns there suggest a
vast potential for educational uses of the Net if schools will
modernize their curricula.
The Visible Man
The doctor, a Scottish-accented man in his fifties or sixties, had
collected a wall full of diplomas and plaques. Perhaps that’s why he
felt entitled to give only the sketchiest of explanations when he told
a Midwestern friend of mine that she might need heart surgery to
avoid a possible stroke. Karen* would be in the hospital just a day or
so. But during this time a surgeon would insert a catheter up her
groin and go on to kill off selected heart cells. With luck, the
operation would end her atrial fibrillation. It had made her heart
throb as quickly as 200 beats a minute on occasion and had sent her
to the emergency room.
Karen pressed for details about the recommended operation.
“Ma’am,” Dr. S. said in a peremptory burr, “this is too technical.”
It was Valentine’s Day and Karen and her husband would rather
have been thinking about hearts in that way alone. But she wanted
to know all. “Ma’am, I’ll draw you a picture,” Dr. S. said a bit
grudgingly. The doctor sketched a crude heart that might as well
have been on a greeting card. Hastily drawn lines showed how
electric impulses were traveling through Karen’s heart with an extra
path. The operation would cut off the surplus wiring, so to speak.
Well, this was a start. But Karen still felt ignorant, and it was her
body into which the catheter would go. And so it is with many
patients, not all, but many. Even good doctors don’t always tell
enough.
The Visible Human Project, however, would make it easier for
Karen to learn more. Dr. S. could have shown Karen a computer

image of an actual human heart and have pointed to the exact areas
that the surgeon would kill off. Karen would have picked up a better
appreciation of the complexities of the proposed operation. At the
same time, Dr. S. could also have juggled around computer images
to show the increased risk of clotting that would result if she failed
to have the operation. Karen would have emerged better informed
and more confident—or less, whatever the facts justified. Someday
she might even be able to dial up on the Internet an animated,
perfectly detailed series of pictures of the operation.
That was what the Visible Human Project would mean. What’s
more, patient education was just one of many uses; the right
technology could revolutionize the training of doctors and advance
medical research.
As far back as the 1980s, such ideas intrigued Michael Ackerman,
a Ph. D. in biomedical engineering who worked for the National
Library of Medicine, part of the National Institutes of Health. He
heard of a project at the University of Washington that was digitizing
the human brain, although not the entire body. Researchers at other
schools hoped to do the same with other organs. But they were less
keen on collecting images and other data than on using them, so
why duplicate each other? Like the Internet itself, then, just one
digitized corpse could help many researchers at once.
In North Carolina a marketing executive with a drug company was
dreaming of a human atlas on a computer screen. Why should
medical students have to make do with fold-out drawings in anatomy
guides? Michael Du Toit, Vice President of marketing for Glaxo Inc.,
passed the idea on to a small company called Butler
Communications, which checked out the technology. Glaxo had three
goals. First, it wanted to create the basic images. Second, it wanted
viewers to be able to wander through the body; ideally they could
move the body for the best view, spin it, travel through it. And third,
it wanted researchers to be able to give the lungs cancer, clog the
arteries to the heart, and demonstrate the effects of drugs. But
computers weren’t ready. “The hype versus the deliverable,” Robert
Butler told me, “was miles and miles apart.” To meet Glaxo’s specs—

to show the body by way of artistic recreations and virtual reality—
might cost as much as $100 million.
Imagine the excitement that Du Toit and Butler must have felt on
learning that academic and government researchers were finally
coming up with the means for this to happen at a fraction of the
expense. The Feds put out a request for proposals for the dissection
job, and the crew at the University of Colorado made the final cut.
Still unanswered was the question of whose corpse would end up on
the Internet. The contest judges allowed a bit more leeway than did
the people choosing Miss America and Mr. Universe.
The ideal candidate for Visibility could be anywhere from maybe
thirty to sixty years of age and be a bit thin or pudgy, albeit not
exceedingly so. Height mustn’t go too far beyond the norms for male
and female. Above all, the innards of the body had to be photogenic
from an anatomical perspective. That weeded out anyone worn
down by cancer or similar disease, not to mention any victims of
automobile accidents or knifings.
A little unfairly, this contest had geographical limits. Texas,
Maryland, and Colorado were the states with subcontracts to provide
the body. I could understand Maryland and Colorado, but Texas? I
wondered if the reason would be the fondness of the people down
there for capital punishment. No longer did bodies have to roast in
electric chairs. Texas helpfully killed its murderers with lethal
injections. So, in this competition, Paul Jernigan was a strong
contender from the beginning.
Murder is an act of the will no matter how poor or Hitlerian our
parents are, or what genes shape us and our brains. But if Fate sent
anyone to the deathhouse gurney and to Visible Manhood, it was
Paul Jernigan. He lived out an updated Dreiser novel.
His full legal name was Joseph Paul Jernigan, and he was born in
Geneva, Illinois, on January 31, 1954, the youngest of Earl
Jernigan’s six children. The boy suffered from asthma and almost
died of it. He and his brothers and sisters typically owned just one
pair of jeans each. Their mother eked it out in a chicken-processing
plant, as a clerk at Montgomery Wards, and at other low-paying
jobs, and they lived in public housing. She married a truck driver

who, like Earl, was a strict disciplinarian toward the children. Later
she suffered a stroke. Afflicted with a learning disorder, Paul flunked
a grade at school and dropped out two years before graduating. He
was a drunk and eventually was doing a pharmacy’s worth of drugs,
from Quaaludes to horse tranquilizers.
The Army trained Paul Jernigan as a mechanic, sent him to
Germany, then tossed him out as unsalvageable. Perhaps
recognizing the cruel matrix that shaped Jernigan, it gave him a
general discharge (a “no comment” in effect) rather than a
dishonorable one. A shrink later found Jernigan to be a passive-
aggressive man who was sometimes TNT-volatile. In the years after
the military Jernigan kept a cooler of ice and beer in his automobile;
a typical paycheck went for pot, cheeseburgers, and enough octane
for himself and the car.
Paradoxically, though, friends trusted Paul Jernigan with their
children. Jernigan was the perfect baby-sitter who enjoyed romping
around with his charges. He married for a stretch and loved his
stepchildren.
But he failed at marriage just as he had failed in school and in the
Army.
Jernigan bungled at burglary, too. He was already a two-time loser
in 1981 when he and a pal named Roy Lamb were driving down the
road in Corsicana, Texas, a small, howdy-neighbor kind of town
south of Dallas on Interstate 45. Emboldened by a night of booze
and pot, the two decided to rob Edward Hale’s house. They began
stuffing their loot into a pillow case when Hale surprised them. Lamb
ran out. Jernigan beat Hale over the head with an ashtray, hoping to
kill off the witness. Hale stubbornly survived. Then Jernigan stabbed
him with a rusty, dull-bladed meat knife, which just bent on Hale’s
chest. And so he took a shotgun and fired until the watchman was
dead. Edward Hale did not die painlessly.
After the murder, Jernigan went to Houston to try to straighten
out his life. He was in a halfway house when arrested.
Some would say Jernigan needn’t have wound up on the gurney;
the law prevented the courts from accepting an accomplice’s
testimony. Mark Ticer, his last attorney, believes that Jernigan may

have felt so contrite that he wanted to die. Ticer grew truly fond of
his client. In character, Jernigan would constantly inquire about the
lawyer’s two-year-old and remember birthdays.
Jernigan gave Ticer’s wife, Cecily, some earrings made from gold
bought with his military pension, and he crafted a wishing-well
bucket for Ticer. Ticer was as trusting of the murderer as Jernigan’s
friends had been; he would have trusted him with his own young
daughter. Even on death row Jernigan would write to the
stepchildren from his failed marriage.
Smoking a hand-rolled cigarette and sipping a Pepsi, he would
discuss legal strategy with Ticer until finally there wasn’t quite so
much to be strategic about.
“Paul,” Ticer more or less said, “things are not going well. I guess
I have to talk about your burial arrangements if they’re going to
execute you. I know your family doesn’t have a lot of money.” And it
was there in the Ellis prison in Huntsville that Ticer learned of The
Gift. Neither knew Jernigan would eventually become the Visible
Man.
Mark Ticer tried for a stay of execution up to the last minute.
Aware of Ticer’s devotion to him, Jernigan asked his lawyer not to
witness his last minutes. Death was almost instant. Paul Jernigan
died much more smoothly than he had lived.
The state anatomical board, a subcontractor of the University of
Colorado, took it from there. Jernigan got one and a half gallons of 1
percent formalin. That was a light touch. Often cadavers are
embalmed with ten gallons of a stronger preservative, and they sit
and pickle for a year, so that when medical students cut them up all
the tissues are gray. But the idea here, in case Jernigan won the
Visible Man honors, was to keep his tissue looking nice and bright
like prime meat; the students would be able to enjoy a better, more
realistic view.
Writing this chapter, I pondered the use of the state anatomical
board as a cadaver procurer. Thank God the board was separate
from the court system. Given the rage for businesslike government, I
could just imagine some of the wilder politicians setting up an
execution quota to work toward a balanced state budget. But the

real reason for the use of Jernigan’s corpse was more prosaic. Texas
had one of the best cadaver-donation programs in the country, and
of some 2,000 bodies that year, his just happened to show up at the
right time and in the right condition.
A Learjet flew Jernigan from Texas to Colorado. Awaiting him were
the masterminds of the dissection effort at the University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center in Denver. Victor Spitzer specialized in
radiology and cellular and structural biology; David Whitlock was a
professor of cellular and structural biology. The people working most
on Jernigan would be the research assistants in the dissection room,
which, day to day, was overseen by Tim Butzer, thirty, and his wife,
Martha Pelster, a bright, curly-haired woman of twenty-five who
would later apply for medical school. Helen Pelster, another
assistant, was the sister of Martha Pelster.[5.6] The whole scenario—
the family connection—begged for embellishment from Stephen King
or Robin Cook.
I asked Martha Pelster if her work haunted her at night. “I kind of
keep it on a pretty even level,” she said. “I don’t have too much
trouble with it.”[5.7] She said Butzer felt the same.
Had Jernigan inspired much after-hours talk with her husband?
“If there was a problem that needed to be worked out.”
But did Pelster and Butzer reflect on the Visible Man’s past in
relation to what was happening now?
“Not too much. Getting emotionally involved with something like
that—you don’t want to discuss it. It isn’t relevant to what we’re
doing.”
Inquiring about the university’s most famous cadaver, I learned
that Jernigan had come with at least two tattoos on his chest area;
they looked vaguely like dragons. His build and muscles were
impressive. The lab had to modify some of the machinery to handle
Jernigan. He showed up with just one testicle, which, I learned
elsewhere, was the aftermath of painful surgery from his military
days. I also heard that another operation had left him without an
appendix. Students and researchers seeking to unravel the mysteries
of appendixdom would just have to turn elsewhere. As a taxpayer,
however, I didn’t feel cheated. This was the States, not Bangladesh;

did that many Americans die without any remnants of surgery?
Jernigan’s cadaver stood head and shoulders above a rival, a woman
who was a chronic alcoholic with visible damage to her liver. In the
hierarchy of the dissection room livers must have counted more than
appendixes.
Before the millimeter-by-millimeter grinding, the scientists treated
Jernigan to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, mixing radio waves
and magnetic fields) and computer-aided tomography (CAT or CT,
which is like topography except that it’s on the innards of the human
body). MRI picks up soft tissue. CAT scans are good for hard tissue,
and for the differences between it and soft tissue. The researchers
CT’ed Jernigan both before and after he was frozen, and these scans
had to correspond with the alignment of the digitized photographs.
Imagine the precision required here.
Preparing to slice the icy cadaver into four blocks for convenient
grinding, the lab crew sharpened up on a less exalted cadaver.
Vertebrae were a problem. “This saw would curve,” Pelster said, “so
you wouldn’t have a perfect perpendicular flat cut. It would have a
curve to it. So we took the cadaver back to the CT scanner and
found the level where we could make a cut.” In the end there were
three cuts and four sections of Jernigan—head and torso, abdomen
and pelvis just down to the thighs, the rest of the thighs and the
knees, and just below the knees to the feet. The frozen pieces went
into an aluminum mold, one at a time. And then the researchers
poured a blue gel around them (the same blue you’ll see on the
edges of the cross sections if you dial them up on the World Wide
Web). The result was four chunks of ice, each approximately 20 by
20 by 15 inches.
The grinding area was the next stop. Plexiglass enclosed it. That
was a must. Pieces of cadaver would fly everywhere as science
turned Paul Jernigan into dust with a spinning, carbide-tipped blade.
“You’d think we’d have trouble sectioning bone,” Pelster said, “but
that’s not been the case. Bone always cuts very clean. But
sometimes we have a lot of trouble with the tendons. The tendons
are such that they don’t want to shear off cleanly, and so a lot of
time we did hand scalpel work on each slice. So the slices might take

ten minutes each instead of four minutes each.” Actually the time
varied. “Ninety slices were the most we cut on any one day, and we
averaged sixty. Sometimes it was ten a day. It was about four
months of sectioning.”
“Were you worried about damaging the goods?” I asked.
“Definitely. We just did the best we could.”
“Any near misses?”
“There were definitely a few. We never were to the point where
we torpedoed the whole project. It would be more a possibility of
losing a slice. We never came close to botching the whole thing. You
look back and you see a little dot of ice here or there, things like
that. You do the best you can. But I think it turned out well.”
All along, of course, cameras and lights were clicking and flashing
away. The slices went into a black-walled, reflection-proof chamber
for photographing by one digital camera and two with film. A table
held the cameras. It turned to give each a view of the cross sections
from the same angle. The results went into a Macintosh Quadra
840AV with 128 megabytes of random access memory and 2
gigabytes of hard disk space. It was, in other words, many times
more powerful and could store at least several times more than the
average personal computer. As with the grinding, problems
sometimes arose. “You think computers are so precise,” Martha
Pelster said, “but they’re not. Things are always going wrong.”
Typically working with her and Tim were such people as the man
who kept the grinding machine running, a camera expert, and a
computer expert (Helen Pelster, Martha’s sister), who would transfer
the digitized Jernigan to tape and CD-ROM. Come the end of a hard
day of photography, the lab crew collected everything and put it
back in the freezer. “And then when we were finished doing this,”
Pelster said, “we had many bags of things that needed to go be
cremated.” The dust went to a contractor for incineration.
Digitized photos and CAT and MRI images from Jernigan went to
National Library of Medicine in Maryland and to the Scientific
Computing Division at the National Center for Atmospheric Research
in Boulder, Colorado. The latter worked with a Cray Y-MP/8
supercomputer and Silicon Graphics workstations to study the

results. A headline on the World Wide Web summed up the
magnitude of the computational task: “The Visible Human Project:
Can It Bring a Supercomputer to Its Knees?” A machine with the
power of the Cray could take the 1,878 cross sections, stack them
like slices of an upright bread loaf, and create electronic bones or
hearts or brains that looked as if they had never been taken apart in
the first place.
By fall 1994, Michael Ackerman at the National Library of Medicine
was ready to tell the world about the electronic Jernigan and to have
his images posted on the Net by way of the weather forecaster’s
facilities. “We hold this out as an example of the future of health
care,” Ackerman said. He predicted that the study of medicine would
become increasingly visual. No one talked then of a murderer, and
so the first stories on the wire services blandly mentioned an
anonymous thirty-nine-year-old donor from Texas who had died of a
drug overdose.
Learning that a digitized corpse would go on the Internet, not
everyone greeted the news with unalloyed praise. Some reviled this
as a waste of Net resources. Why not use CD-ROMs to distribute the
information? To an extent I could see their arguments. The Library
was releasing sixteen gigabytes of images at the start, and even
someone with a deluxe Net connection could spend a week or so
downloading it. Critics believed that this squandered bandwidth, that
it was a bit like cruising down a narrow country road with an
overgrown tour bus and fifty cars honking at it from behind. The
strain on the Internet was far from that bad. But even by Net
standards this was indeed a behemoth, and much more importantly,
the bandwidth defenders worried about the precedent being set
here. Sixteen gigabytes of images was equivalent to 8 billion pages
of double-spaced typing. Individual e-mail messages commonly took
up only a page or two.
Even so, the Visible Man had his friends out there in cyberspace.
Anxious to beat rivals to the data, one company kept its modems
pumping away for a week until it had received all of Jernigan. It
didn’t want to wait weeks or months for tapes. Thanks to the Net,
many people throughout the world could receive Jernigan at the

same time. In the first few months of the release, more than 900
companies, schools, and people wrote Ackerman about licenses
giving them permission to use the data in experiments and products.
Some 100 actually followed through—everyone from pharmaceutical
firms to a young artist who, according to Ackerman, assured him
that she would make tasteful use of the images.
Luckily from a bandwidth perspective, you didn’t have to download
all of Jernigan. Each slice was a mere seven megabytes in a spatial
resolution of 2,048 by 1,216 pixels (several times sharper than that
of a typical personal computer). A maker of software for
ophthalmologists could pull down only the images dealing with the
eye and related brain areas. Those aiming for the podiatry market
could focus on the feet and ankles. What’s more, even without a
license, ordinary Net users could dial up Jernigan Lite, so to speak,
from the World Wide Web.
Coming over the Net eventually would be more than just the raw,
unprocessed images. Refined versions—for example, animated
Jernigans, rotating in 3-D, or even virtual reality versions—could go
anywhere in the world. And when they did, researchers and students
would be wanting their own pet views. CD-ROMs just didn’t store
enough data to anticipate all the possibilities. Typically they could
hold maybe 650 megabytes of data. Even extended, the storage
would offer a fraction of what could be available via high-speed
connections to sites from Paris to Melbourne.
Jernigan, you might say, was more than just the material for a
medical experiment. He was also a focus of a research project to
develop special formats for libraries of visual information on the Net.
Eventually people would be able to download not just images but
also the “objects” that made up the images.
“These objects will have knowledge in them,” Michael Ackerman
said, “so they know how they relate to each other and the rest of
the scheme. Say you ask for the heart. What you get of course is the
not a picture of the heart but the objects that made up the heart
that your software has now rendered as the heart. If you point to
something on the heart, it can open up because it’s made up of
these objects. And if you point to something on the margin of the

heart and say “What is attached here?” that object on the margin
knows what its nearest neighbor is even though it’s not in the
picture. And it knows to go back to the database and bring up what’s
attached to it.”
Such an approach might even take advantage of Web-style
technology to link together libraries at a number of locations. So you
might smoothly travel from, say, a processed image of a blood vessel
done up at School X to an animated image of a heart as tweaked by
Company Y.
Those uses would increase the load on the Internet, of course. But
ultimately the principle of the expanding pipeline might work to the
benefit of all. That is, the heavier the traffic on the Net, the heftier
the connections would be built. So in the end, everything would be
cheaper—from image transmissions to sending one-page notes by
electronic mail. The challenge, of course, was for this to happen
without the costs of ordinary Net users being driven up by the
workload that the image libraries and similar endeavors would bring
about. That’s where TeleRead might come in. It could systematically
promote the mass use of electronic forms for tax documents,
business transactions, and other purposes. And indirectly the money
saved on paperwork could go not only toward a national library but
also to help upgrade the present Internet for researchers and the
world at large.
Right now people tended to see the applications of the Net in
terms of one use versus another—in terms of money for low-cost
networks for consumer education versus high-bandwidth
connections of the kind that Ackerman wanted. With a TeleRead-
style approach and enough imagination, however, we could take full
advantage of the economies of the technology. And so although we
would not end the clashes between Net users with different
priorities, we could at least reduce them.
Several other cost-related questions arose beyond those of the
expense of the network connections. I wondered how much patients
would be charged to see a picture of the innards of Jernigan or a
Visible Woman. Robert Butler doubted that his client, Glaxo, was
ready to say. However, he left me with the impression that this

probably would not be pay per view. Glaxo had its own reasons for
going ahead—for example, showing doctors the effects of its
pharmaceuticals on the body. So, no, he said, this was not a plot to
gouge the public with peep shows.
A related issue, arising from the involvement of drug companies,
was the question of proprietary information. While the images were
on the Internet for all to see, this project was not entirely in the
spirit of the Net’s openness. Butler, for example, might have feared
that I was working for a rival corporation, and he waited several
weeks to return my calls. I could understand his reasons. Still, I was
startled to learn that Ackerman at the National Institutes of Health
would not even release to me a list of the companies that had
licensed the use of the images. Nor had NIH organized a newsgroup
or a mailing list. Surely all the hundreds of licensees would have
common problems, common opportunities, that they could discuss
without imperiling each other’s projects.
Yet another question went back to one of the main reasons given
for the project. Could medical students really learn by hooking into
the Net and dialing up the images from the Visible Man? David Dean
should have been a complete booster of this endeavor. He was, after
all, a Ph. D. who worked in medical imaging and taught anatomy at
Case Western Reserve University. And yet he told me, “I feel you
can’t replicate the experience in the anatomy lab. Students will have
no time for this stuff. They’re totally overwhelmed. They can see the
same structures again and again in different bodies.”
At the University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, Gerry Oxford,
professor of physiology, said that seeing organs in three dimensions
wasn’t the same as feeling them. “Physicians in training need a
visceral appreciation of the fact that they will have responsibility for
the human body.” Even a believer in the project, Marc Nelson,
assistant dean of medical education at the Stanford University
School of Medicine in Palo Alto, worried that electronic anatomy
could lessen contacts between students and teachers.[5.8]
Real bodies, however, cost universities $600 each—assuming they
could get them in the first place. And students would not have
eyeballs, hearts, hands, and livers to themselves.

Of all the boosters of the project, Martha Pelster may have been
the most persuasive. She worked as a lab assistant, had cut up
dozens of bodies, and now was headed to medical school. “When
you look at this cadaver,” Pelster said of the digitized Jernigan,
“everything is still in its orientation. When you go in and dissect, you
take a lot of stuff out. If you cut something wrong or cut through
something and toss the object into the reject bin, you’ve lost it. But
with this visible male, you can go back in again. You can see what
happened before your lab partner went in there and messed up your
cadaver. This cross-sectional anatomy is going to be the be-all and
end-all. A book can’t have this many cross sections, this good.”
Just as important, no one in the project, from Ackerman to Pelster,
was touting electronic cadavers as a complete substitute for the real
ones that the medical students studied. The digitized versions would
simply augment the real cadavers, the ones that you couldn’t reboot
if you cut them the wrong way. In the new era, medical schools
could even require students to put the human body together, not
just take it apart.
Cadavers in cyberspace would offer yet another advantage: even
schoolchildren could study them. People for the Ethical Treatment of
Animals and some rock-n-roll musicians such as Pearl Jam were
asking schools to “cut out dissection” and use computer imaging or
model frogs. Thanks to the Visible Human Project, however, students
someday would do better than just viewing pixels flashing across the
screen. They would be able to tour the body of an actual human.
Potential medical students, moreover, could get a head start. Long
before they reached the slicing rooms, they would be familiar with
electronic cadavers and be able to make better use of the real ones.
What’s more, the digitized Jernigan could revolutionize training in
laparoscopic surgery, where doctors inserted tubes in patients and
operated with tiny instruments and TV-like monitors and cameras.
The view on the video screen of a training computer could be true to
life.
All this was not even to mention other applications—for example,
computer-simulated crash tests to improve auto safety, efforts to
study the range of wrist motion and reduce carpal tunnel syndrome

in typists, or investigations of ways to protect athletes against
injuries.
I asked Mark Ticer if Jernigan’s family had ever thought of suing
for any of the wealth that the project might create from medical
products and the rest.
The answer pleased me in this litigious era. Ticer said that if
anything the family would be offended that anyone raised the issue.
That was the way Jernigan and his kin were. “There wasn’t a
condition attached to his gift,” Ticer said.
Sharon Kuster, Jernigan’s sister, said her brother would “probably
be happy about it. I am.”
“Now he can be remembered for all the good he did rather than
all the evil,” Ticer said. “I think he’d be quietly delighted.” I picked up
on the “quietly.” Jernigan’s invisibility, prior to his crimes, was not
just because of his station or lack of station in life. That was his way.
Many other inmates on death row gravitated toward microphones.
Jernigan spurned them. The true crime book, if one ever resulted,
would never have come out while he was walking and breathing.
Shortly after I talked to Mark Ticer and Sharon Kuster, my friend
Karen got the results of an intensive examination by a second
doctor. It seemed that Karen would not be undergoing the heart
surgery. But even now she couldn’t tell for sure. What’s more, if
Karen received drugs instead, the medical benefits of the Visible Man
might still help her someday; a major pharmaceutical company, after
all, was hoping to use the digitized cadaver as a tool to explore and
demonstrate the effects of its products.
My thoughts shifted back to Jernigan the human. Lying on the
death gurney, awaiting the poison, would he have wanted to make
The Gift if someone had rushed in and asked at the last minute, “Do
you realize you’ll be all over the Internet? That you’ll suffer the
ultimate invasion of privacy? That strangers from here to Oslo will
see your guts?” I’d like to think that Jernigan would have nodded
and the Learjet would still have flown the body up to Denver. For the
sake of Karen, of other sick people, of those who just might live
longer and better if their surgeons were slightly more skilled, or if
they themselves could make the right decisions about their medical

care—for the sake of them all, I was not-so-quietly delighted that
the invisible man was now visible.

Schools: Park View Educational
Centre
The big motto out of the United States, in the 1990s, seemed to
be, “Build jail cells, not classrooms.” Again and again, politicians
would promise to shrink the bloat in school budgets while Fighting
Crime; I shared some of their skepticism toward the edutocracy.
Washington, D. C., was Exhibit A here. In one recent year the city
had shelled out half a billion on public schools but paid just $2
million for books.
Suppose, however, that U. S. schools had been spending their
money in a way that helped keep children out of jail and helped
them learn. Americans might do well to study Park View Education
Centre. It is a high school up in the Canadian province of Nova
Scotia, and something weird and wonderful had been happening
there over the past few years. At Park View the Internet was not
reserved just for the usual suspects—the would-be Bill Gateses, the
local Steve Jobses, the prodigies who already owned PCs and Macs
and were dialing up Christie Brinkley photos on electronic bulletin
boards. Many of the children on the Net were the at-risk students,
those in danger of leaving Park View because of academic or
disciplinary problems.
They were in the “general-stream” track. And just as in the States,
the college-bound children looked down on them. That was unfair.
Many of the general students were bright and simply didn’t want to
go to college. Some of the general boys, not all, wore black leather
jackets, tight jeans, and black boots. And they used razor blades to
tattoo the logos of Ford and Chevy onto their skins. The at-risk girls
were less colorful. But some had disciplinary problems of their own,
along with the same lack of interest in academics. What’s more,
certain teenagers in the area were doing marijuana and hashish and

boozing it up; teachers at Park View worried constantly that the
wilder of the students would turn up on the police blotters.
Fighting against pot smoking and other behavior of the Jernigan
variety, some teachers at Park View systematically used the Net to
bolster the egos of the general students while also improving their
scholastic skills. Yes, alarms went off in my head when I heard the
word “self-esteem.” Too often, at least in the States, this quality
came at the cost of academics. Saying, “You’re good!” was not
enough. Gold stars—if dishonestly earned—would just teach the
children that the educators were liars.
Some teachers at Park View Education Centre, however, were
mixing self-esteem with reading and writing in a way that true Net
nerds would love. And it was happening in a cash-strapped place a
continent removed from Silicon Valley in both distance and technical
expertise.
This was not borderline Canada. Park View Education Centre was
a good two days’ drive from the state of Maine. The school served
Lunenburg County, a mostly rural area settled by German-speaking
people whose descendants still reverted to dialect. Bridgewater (pop.
9,000 or so) was the nearest town. Named for the modest bridge
across the La Havre River, it was in many respects All Canadian—
with streets with names like “King” and “Queen” and “Prince.”
Businesses such as Gow’s Hardware and Rofihe’s Men’s Wear had
been in the same families for generations. The Bridgewater area
boasted a Michelin tire plant, too, and a mall and twin cinemas. And
it was growing. But many inhabitants were displaced farmers,
lumberjacks, and cod fishermen; tensions from work or the lack of it
could show up in some homes, to the disadvantage of the children.
When I was researching this chapter, Canada’s unemployment rate
was 10 percent, while Lunnenburg County’s was 12-13 percent.
In at least one way, Park View Education Centre may have
reflected both the business climate and the Canadian winters, or
perhaps just some of the educational crazes of yesteryear. Park View
was built in the late ’70s with narrow little windows that more or less
cheated the classrooms of a river view. Those slots were somewhat
emblematic; many children hadn’t been outside Nova Scotia. Even

among the academic-track students, fewer than 40 percent were
making it to college. Park View, then, was not quite the stereotypical
place for educational high tech.
Still, the provincial government, colleges, and the business
community had been quietly working with Park View and other
schools to upgrade the workforce. In this spirit an education
professor at Mount Saint Vincent University, in Halifax, organized a
project called Learning Connections. Pitching in was the Nova Scotia
Technology Network. One idea was to use computers to hook
students in with employers by way of the Internet to give them a
taste of the workplace. It would happen. But something would
overshadow it—student-to-student communication over the Net.
Jeff Doran, a technophobic English teacher at Park View, wasn’t
sure what to think when he first heard of the grand plans. His tenth
grade class of general students did not exactly teem with computer
nerds. Many of the children had flunked a grade. “Some of them had
reading levels down around grade three or four. One or two maybe
would have been considered at a grade ten level. I didn’t have any
goal except to try to keep them in school and keep them in class.”
He also had his share of questions about the project itself. “All we
were told was that we would get some computers, and then we’d
get this connection through the phone lines, and the students would
be able to write to people around the world, and then when the
project was over at the end of the year, we could keep the
hardware. I had no idea what we were then going to do with it, and
I certainly had never used it before.” Doran didn’t even own a
television or answering machine. “I still had a phonograph. But I
didn’t even have a tape player, and I had been writing on the
typewriter all my life.”
But Doran had something else going for him, something even
more helpful than technological expertise. And that was an
abundance of good, teacherish skills and empathy for his students,
even the ones with the tattoos. He himself had rebelled. A Harvard
graduate, he had fled the United States during the Vietnam War to
avoid the draft. Doran’s exact political beliefs weren’t the point here,
though; a dare-devil Green Beret might have shown the same ability

to brook the foibles of the general students. What mattered was that
Doran cared more about results than about whether the children
followed every little rule. Above all he cultivated rather than feared
the students’ ability to think on their own.
The Nova Scotia Technology Network provided some technical
help, but would not instantly answer every question. “So,” Doran
recalled, “we did a lot of muddling through ourselves and a lot of
teaching of each other. And that was one of the best things. Some of
the students became teachers because they learned by
experimenting, and then they showed each other. And invariably
they showed me, and so I learned from them. The first thing I
discovered was that there could be no front of the room. It had
twelve computers in it that circled around the walls. And there was
no way that I could stand at any point and demand everybody’s
attention. I learned that in about three minutes of the first period.”
Significantly, Jeff Doran’s English class for general students had a
one-to-one ratio between students and computers, a stark contrast
to those in just about all other public schools in Canada and
elsewhere. Students could use the machines not only for networking
but also for word processing. In fact, they started using the
machines so often that in those early days, Doran was holding
classes in the computer lab regularly rather than in the scheduled
rooms.
I asked Doran which students he remembered most vividly from
those first days on the Net, and two came to his mind: Betty* and
Mac*. Betty was the only girl of the twelve students on the first day
of school. “She was, uhm, kind of an old-fashioned, sweet-faced
girl,” Doran said, “with one of the foulest mouths that I ever
encountered. Yeah. But she had to be to hold her own against these
boys. She was surly and sullen and stubborn with me, and I don’t
think she ever actually came to blows with any of the boys, but she
came pretty darned close.” Betty was brighter than most in the class.
And yet, feisty or not, she lacked self-confidence. Many would have
written her off. More than a few teachers regarded the general
classes as a dumping ground. “She was pretty unimpressed by what

she could do in the computer room,” Doran said. “She at first was
doing most of her assignments by handwriting.”
Meanwhile Mac was hardly off to the most promising of starts. His
head was shaved into a Mohawk. A reform school alum, he was
short and stocky and looked a bit like a small World Wrestling
Federation champ, according to Doran. Mac’s face bore scars from
the fights he got into. He would regularly pound the bejeezus out of
other teenagers. “I’m not sure why Mac was in school,” Doran said.
“It may have had something to do with the law—either school or jail.
He was not happy to be here. And his skills were very, very low. He
was about the lowest I had ever seen in a student.”
Okay, so this was the raw material. I didn’t expect Doran to turn
either Betty or Mac into Oxford dons—everything was relative—but I
wondered how far he had gotten with the computers and the
Internet.
“Well,” Doran said, “once she finally started on the computer, she
started writing more than she had ever written before. And I believe
that’s how you learn to write, by writing.” She organized her
sentences and paragraphs better, her vocabulary expanded, and
fewer spelling errors popped up in her work—not just because she
could spellcheck but because she cared more. Her scrawlings in a
loose-leaf notebook hadn’t looked so impressive. But now she could
use a computer printer and see the same, beautiful results as an
honors student doing a ten-page thesis.
“The second big difference,” said Doran, “was that she was writing
e-mail to other students. Suddenly she had an immediate audience.
This wasn’t some make-believe English project where we would
pretend to have a pen pal somewhere and pretend to write to them.
This was a real person who was going to read that message and
respond right away, and that kind of feedback made her, and made
all of the students, suddenly aware of the importance of an
audience. And an audience in writing is something that they had
never experienced before, because the audience was the teacher
and who cares what the teacher thinks? Except that the teacher
gives you the mark, so you just write what you think the teacher
wants you to say.

“But now Betty and the others had people who would write back
and forth about their weekends, and their boyfriends, and their
dates, and their sports, and their hobbies, and their cats, and so on.
And I think it opened up a sensitivity to what was acceptable in
print, and how your words can affect people, and the differences
between people—especially over great distances, because a large
number of the students that we were writing to in Vancouver were
Asian. In fact they were fairly recent immigrants to Canada, so their
English wasn’t that great. So actually Betty’s writing skills were
better.” And that, in turn, helped her think better of herself.
Meanwhile Mac, too, was progressing. At the start Doran gave Mac
and others a list of twenty words; they were then to look up the
definitions and use the words in sentences. The time limit was four
weeks. Mac needed the month. He couldn’t even cheat well; copying
others’ work, he blundered because he did not know what he was
cribbing. “The last thing that he could ever see himself doing,” Doran
said, “would be sitting in front of a computer, you know, at a
keyboard. With these beefy fingers of his, he was gonna tap away? I
mean, that was out of the question.”
Doran, however, managed to stretch out Mac’s attention span to
put up with the limits of the machines—to give them the detailed
instructions they needed. In computerdom, people use the term
“boot up” to mean turning on their machines or loading programs
into them. And, Doran recalled, “There were times I half expected
he was gonna literally boot this thing across the room.”
“Yes,” Mac snapped back at Doran, “I’ll boot the friggin’ thing up!”
“And yet,” Doran recalled, “within that one year he was writing
messages to pals in other schools and to me as well.”
By then Betty wasn’t just sassing back the boys when they teased
her. She was actually teaching them how to use the equipment. Her
marks shot up to the 90s. Not content just to write a few short
paragraphs, she was turning out well-organized letters several
hundred words long in a professional-looking business format. That
was unimpressive by the standards of academic students, but a true
triumph for Betty; she even zapped off a paper letter to a suspense

novelist she admired. The writing skills she developed on the Net
had helped make this possible.
Simultaneously her opinion of herself rose to the point where she
was one of the chattier participants in a video that Park View
students helped make, and that was later shown on a Halifax
television station. Students shot scenes to send across Canada to
counterparts at a school in Vancouver, British Columbia. And Betty
showed up again and again on camera. It would have been nice to
write that she went on to college, but she did not. She ended up a
waitress. Partly due to the Net, however, she surely was a better
waitress—more at ease with her customers, and better material
someday for management if that was what she wanted.
And Mac? “One of the last things I got from him,” Doran said,
“was a message about how he felt he had been changing that year,
and how he had been improving. And I agreed—I thought he had,
too. And then just about that time, he pulled this stupid move and
got drunk while he was on a class trip and got kicked out of the
school.” But the story didn’t end then. “Mac moved to British
Columbia and is gainfully employed. In the boys’ cases, the measure
of success is that they are not in jail. In 1990, probably ten boys
were at risk of failing and dropping out of school. Two were at risk of
ending up behind bars or dead.”
Reflecting on past and present students at Park View, Doran noted
the little triumphs which led to the big ones. The Net helped whet
the children’s interest in school—to the point where, often, just
about all the students in his first period showed up. It was a virtual
miracle, given the sleep hunger of adolescents.
Clearly the Net could be a truant officer’s best friend. “I use
computers a lot,” one enthusiastic student e-mailed me from
Bridgewater. “I come in on any free time that I have, I even give up
my lunch hour to play with the computer, but I would really like to
have more class time in the computer room.” She said that
computers “hold so much wonder to a person. Like me. Writing on a
computer does help out with reading and writing skills.” Another
student, a tenth grader who lacked a computer at home, told how
much he’d enjoyed corresponding with an aunt and uncle in

Winnipeg. At the time he e-mailed me, his relatives had just had a
son, and his e-mail was going into their baby book. Textbooks alone
would never, never have encouraged him to look forward to school
the way the Net did.
I asked Doran if there were any test scores for the children to
document the Internet’s benefits to the children at Park View. He
said that scores by themselves would mislead since he had improved
as a teacher in other ways. And yet he believed the Net had helped;
since he couldn’t supervise the class constantly, he had learned to
foster curiosity among the students as they explored the Net on their
own. He and some other teachers in the experiment understood that
they and the children would be learning from each other, that the old
authority models were gone. The same trend was gradually
happening in industry in Canada and the world at large. So if Doran
wasn’t turning out Ph. D. s, he at least was creating better workers.
Other reasons existed for his success. The videotape reinforced
the Net experiences. The Park View students looked forward to
seeing their counterparts. Much more importantly, Doran let children
use the Internet in ways that meant the most to them. The Net was
like the videotape. Doran had expected his students to shoot
pictures of quaint homes, of beaches, of the usual, touristy sites,
when they were showing off the Bridgewater area. Instead the
students photographed the places where they worked and shopped.
And that told all. The e-mail was the same way; students would
most benefit from the technology if it was on their own terms. At
Park View, some virtual romances even developed between the
students and those elsewhere. One boy wrote to a Florida school
asking to be put in touch with a cheerleader.
Yet another explanation for Doran’s success was that students
could spend hour after hour on their computer. So they had plenty of
time for school compositions and for writing letters to friends in
Vancouver and elsewhere. (That wasn’t true of all the students in
latter years. Although Doran felt they did well, they might have done
still better with more time.)
Perhaps most important of all, the machines didn’t put down the
general students the way so many humans did. “It’s been my

experience that the technology benefits the struggling student much
more than it does any other student—in literacy growth, self-esteem,
tech skills,” said Lorri Neilsen, the education professor at Mount Saint
Vincent University who had started the Learning Connections project
at Park View and elsewhere.
The positives aside, the Bridgewater experiment was not a
complete triumph. “It’s very important to know the spirit of this
project was carried by a handful of teachers,” Neilsen said. In fact,
just eight of forty teachers in the school participated in the project.
Skeptics were worried about it taking time away from the usual
curriculum. Yet another problem was the authority question; some
teachers had to know everything and were nervous about students
learning behind their backs. A third complication was gender: Many
female teachers were uncomfortable around technology.
Answers and solutions existed to all those challenges. In the case
of academic students, I could appreciate the need to cover a vast
range of subjects that colleges demanded. But with a TeleRead-style
arrangement, just about all the major resources would be online
anyway. Old material over a period of time could be scanned into the
national database—a highly economical way to distribute it, and
even better by archival criteria alone since unread paper material
might well disintegrate anyway without anyone caring about it.
Even with the Net as it existed then, students of all kinds learned
many shortcuts that enabled them to turn out better papers. The
knowledge on the Net was far, far shallower on the whole than at,
say, the Library of Congress in the States. But it may well have
exceeded what the students could find in some small-town libraries.
If nothing else, by logging onto the Net, they could learn how to
stay up with the most current knowledge—no small edge in an era
when new products replaced old ones in months rather than in
years, and when academic journals proliferated.
What about the authority question? That could diminish in time if
schools of education shifted gears and encouraged teachers to foster
curiosity rather than have students focus just on textbooks and
teacher-certified facts. Would it happen in the United States without
a concerted, TeleRead-style effort? Maybe. But I doubted this.

If nothing else, public schools needed to give their teachers more
time to master the hardware and the Internet so they would not feel
so lost when their students roamed the Net; the equipment alone
wasn’t enough. “Basic technology training is one of the most
neglected aspects of educational reform,” said Andy Carvin, the Net-
oriented educational expert at the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting. “More often than not, when a school or a school
district implements a major technology overhaul, teachers are
introduced to the Internet and all of its tools in a day or two of
‘training.’” Carvin told me, and he was right, that teachers should
enjoy regular use of the technology at home and at school so the
knowledge wouldn’t fade away. Too, they needed to know how to
“combine that knowledge with traditional teaching and
curricula.... It’s like learning to use a telephone—you can be taught
to pick up the receiver and press a few numbers, but if you don’t
have anyone else’s number or don’t know how to give out your own
number it’s useless.”
I asked Lorri Neilsen about Canada, and she said that schools of
education up there were making good progress toward correcting
deficiencies. They had better. In the new era of giant databases
there should be more emphasis on finding and evaluating
information from many sources, and less on parroting textbooks.
Teachers should encourage children to look for malarkey in all
media, but especially on the Net, given all the self-publishing there.
Perhaps with more women growing up with computers, female
teachers in the future wouldn’t suffer so much from the old
bugaboos about networks and smart, curious, uppity students.
That still left another issue—the possibility that students might
send offensive messages over the Net and perhaps fixate on its
wilder areas such as the alt. sex series of newsgroups.
“We did have a couple of cases of students in the school sending
threatening and hateful messages,” Doran said, “but these were not
my students. These were what I would call hackers, computer
nerds.” Later Park View forced students to sign agreements under
which they would lose their privileges if they abused the Net. This
was not a hypothetical issue to me. As I was researching this

chapter, I found “Fuck you all” in the subject line of a public
message of a list devoted to educational uses of the Internet. A
student at an American school had taken over someone else’s
account. Making students sign agreements wasn’t a total solution,
but it was a good one. If a student misbehaved and lost Net
privileges, then he or she would be at a considerable disadvantage
in competing with peers.
Addressing the newsgroup question, Park View filtered out the
groups it deemed objectionable. I suspected that a smart student
could circumvent these precautions, but if that happened, he might
well have been intelligent enough to cope with the virtual
temptations.
Off the Net, at any rate, students could just as well find
questionable reading material. I remembered the pictures of Marilyn
Monroe that my classmates passed around in elementary school
back in the 1950s. Did anything change? Should we really deprive
children of the glories of the Net under the assumption that the kids
were all potential pervs? The best approach was the Park View—one
making children sign agreements that they would be responsible for
their own actions, and suspending or ending their much-cherished
Internet privileges if they abused them.
Risks aside, the Internet was a natural place for students of all
kinds. Only a fool would dwell on the hazards of the net to the
exclusion of the possibilities there.
Would that all activities of government be as benign (well, for the
most part) as those of the schools. In the next chapter we’ll learn
about Phil Zimmermann and his brushes with the darker, almost Big
Brotherish side of government.

CHAPTER
SIX
Governments and the
Net: Making Sure
Orwell Was Wrong
If a programmer named Phil Zimmermann had his druthers, he
would be leading a pretty sedate life on the whole. He drives a
Saturn, lives in a small house in a middle-class suburb in Colorado
with his wife and children, and dons a suit and does a pretty good
yuppie act when he consults for East Coast companies. In California
he fits in with his blue jeans. Short and paunchy, he is bearded yet
harmless.
Some American bureaucrats, however, would lump Zimmermann
in with CIA turncoats and peddlers of illegal plutonium. In November
1994 customs agents detained him at a Washington-area airport
when he was reentering the States from Eastern Europe. Twice they
combed through his bags then warned him that in the future he
might be in for more of the same.
Why this Kafkaesque treatment? Because many in the U. S.
national security establishment hate Phil Zimmermann’s guts. He
came up with Pretty Good Privacy, or PGP for short—a snoop-
resistant way of transmitting e-mail over the Internet and other
networks.
Zimmermann loathes snoops and jackboots. Clearly he was not in
the former communist Europe to subvert democracies; in fact, he
was telling people how encryption[6.1] could help preserve their

freedom. “I don’t have to explain to Eastern Europe,” he said, “why
it is important for their governments not to get too powerful.”[6.2]
This dictator-proofing helped win Phil Zimmermann a “Pioneer
Award” from the Electronic Frontier Foundation, the civil liberties
group, which praised him for creating “a worldwide standard for e-
mail encryption.”
Zimmermann, however, as the Net’s many libertarians are quick to
note, may end up in jail for allegedly having violated an American
export law that carries penalties as high as a decade in prison and a
million-dollar fine. The Feds treat PGP-style software as a weapon
just like Stealth bombers, ballistic missiles, and nuclear warheads.
And some Washington bureaucrats hate the idea of such a privacy
protector in the hands of too many civilians who are not, well,
Washington bureaucrats.
Even if the Feds don’t indict and convict Zimmermann, the U. S.
government has already done its share of bullying here.
The U. S. Constitution forbids prosecutors from dragging
Zimmermann into an overlit room and interrogating him without a
lawyer present. Tell that to Washington, however. Although the law
bans the export rather than the import of powerful encryption
software, customs agents at Dulles Airport, eager for any excuse
they could find, quizzed Zimmermann when he returned from
Eastern Europe. An oft-zealous enemy of privacy, the Clinton
Administration has even promoted the manufacture of encryption
devices that would let Feds listen in on supposedly confidential
phone calls. Washington is also spending billions of tax dollars to
make telephone lines more susceptible to tapping.
Zimmermann, meanwhile, has been working on a phone-style
piece of software. Used on the right computer with a $50 sound card
and a $7 microphone, it would let people speak securely over the
Internet or ordinary phone lines.
Bill Clinton’s snoops must love Zimmermann about as much as
they enjoy static during wiretaps. Here’s a man who they fear could
break the connection altogether. Many in Washington, especially FBI
Director Louis Freeh, would love to see unauthorized encryption
banned entirely, the real issue here. And Republican Senator Charles

Grassley of Iowa has proposed to make it a crime to distribute
scrambling programs by way of international nets if the Feds lacked
the electronic keys to defeat them. The Grassley measure would
even ban some software now classified as exportable.
Like it or not, however, Washington no longer can control the fate
of industrial-strength encryption.
Far too many Americans—and Russians, Germans, Czechs,
Iranians, Singaporeans, Malaysians, Japanese, Chinese, you name it
—know about the technology. The Feds instead should focus on
different law enforcement techniques, and on powerful computers to
unravel the bad guys’ codes. But the Clinton people and their allies
won’t budge. They keep dreaming of the mass use of D. C.-blessed
hardware and software to let law enforcement people listen in on
supposedly confidential phone calls. Just like the old Soviet KGB, the
Feds think that bureaucracy can prevail over technology, and that
government has a God-given right to force citizens to be snoop-
friendly.
The saga of Phil Zimmermann is hardly the only indication that
some Big Brotherism is alive and well in the United States—
especially when one considers other outrages, such as the recent
net. censorship jihad or the elitist copyright proposals that would
crimp public debate.
In all fairness, the United States is less backwards on encryption
matters than are countries such as France, which bans powerful
cryptography for private use.[6.3] And certainly Bill Clinton isn’t a
dictator. In fact, the trouble with him, at least at the personal level,
is the opposite: He is too much of a wimp to resist civil liberties
threats from the FBI, the National Security Agency, other
bureaucracies, and the more maniacal of the “law-and-order” crowd
on the Hill.
Whatever Clinton’s problem, though, his encryption policy is
making him reviled among many skeptical young people in
Generation Net, not to mention the baby boomers, who suffered lie
after lie from LBJ and Robert McNamara during the Vietnam War. A
lifelong Democrat, I voted for Clinton. I might not again. His
constitutional lapses, or at least those of his bureaucrats, just might

help pave the way for true Orwellian scenarios in the United States
and elsewhere.
So might the shameful war that a powerful Clinton appointee has
waged against public libraries, one of society’s best defenses against
Orwellian Ministries of Truth.
“Making Sure Orwell Was Wrong,” then, is an apt sub-title for this
chapter. You’ll remember the basics of the novel 1984—bureaucrats
tinkered with back issues of the London Times to suit the policies of
the moment, brainwashed the proles of Oceania, and spied on most
everyone with TV cameras. All had to obey the mythical Big Brother.
The most vivid image from 1984 was a boot smashing again and
again into a man’s face. In the era of mainframe computers bigger
than overgrown Cadillacs, many critics of the Vietnam War invoked
Orwell and similar pessimists. Wouldn’t pasty-faced drones in
windowless rooms use the technology to keep dossiers on us?
Then microcomputers popped up. Suddenly good people could use
bits and bytes to fight back against Big Brother. Amnesty
International, for example, could keep databases documenting
murder, torture, and other crimes by dictators. And then, via the
Internet and other networks, Amnesty could spread the news around
and marshal world opinion against the thugs. Other human rights
groups and environmental organizations benefited, too, and soon
most everyone agreed about high tech: George Orwell had been
wrong. Progressives with unpopular ideas celebrated the new tools
available to them. And conservatives didn’t disagree that Big Brother
was dead; if microcomputers could nurture freedom and diversity,
why worry so much about antitrust laws and other regulations? A
New York think-tanker would eventually write a reverse 1984 in
which hackers won over Big Brother.[6.4]
Meanwhile, an open government movement was growing on the
Internet, along with efforts to use networks as an efficient conduit
for services. Far from being Big Brotherish in all ways, Clinton’s
people commendably put a wealth of official documents on the Net,
everything from White House speeches to reports from the
Agriculture Department. The states, too, acted. Californians could
track down a complete set of laws and proposed laws on the

Internet. North Carolinians could hook into an electronic job bank,
indicate their desired kind of work, click on a map to designate a
favored location, and watch jobs pop up. Oregonians could get
fishing-and hunting-license information online.
Bureaucrats in Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, New
Zealand, Argentina, Finland, Austria, Poland, Japan, and a host of
other countries went on the Net to one extent or another.
Even Singapore, hardly famous for civil liberties and freedom of
information, took a few steps to open up. I was surprised and
pleased to find on a government server a 1993 Wired article with the
not-so-flattering title of “The Intelligent Island?” Like many
countries, Singapore faced a dilemma. Would the country’s strict
culture suffer if the masses were allowed access to the Net?
Singapore had flogged an American teenager merely for vandalizing
automobiles; imagine if authorities instead had caught him in a sex
act with a local. The whip was in character; it was a source of local
pride, not shame. And yet if Singapore didn’t truly open itself on the
Internet, if it couldn’t provide a hospitable electronic environment to
megaconglomerates, the country would fall behind nations with a
freer flow of information.
“Most Singaporeans are little rule followers,” a local hacker told
Wired. “They are used to being spoon-fed what they are supposed
to know by the government.” He predicted that Singapore would
turn into a “controlled information center. The government will try to
suppress hackers.”[6.5] And yet the very distribution of the article—for
all to see on a Web server, amid official government documents—
told me that the Orwellian scenario was not a full certainty. If
Singapore could ease up a little, there might yet be a little hope for
the rest of the cosmos.
However, the need for some healthy paranoia remains, even if,
yes, Orwell overstated his case. An Internet Central doesn’t exist for
bureaucrats to shut down, of course; messages can arrive by way of
many paths, and electronic mail if need be can travel over normal
voice lines. But martinets of all ilks can’t resist the urge to censor or
unplug. A government computer in Canada is rumored to be

programmed to reject Anglo-Saxonisms as passwords, and I don’t
doubt it. Would that all outrages were so funny.
Claiming software piracy, cops shut down the electronic bulletin
boards of scores of Italian progressives. “In some places, ” the
activist Bernardo Parrella reported, “sleeping people were abruptly
woken up facing machine guns. ” The boards were part of FidoNet, a
worldwide BBS system with electronic mail connections to the
Internet. Significantly the police didn’t undertake similar harassment
against the high-tech admirers of Hitler and Mussolini. The victims
were liberal or left wing. Within a year, the Italian cops were back at
it again, seizing computers, disks, books, diaries, and other materials
from citizens suspected of anarchistic sympathies. This time the
police made no pretense; the raids were clearly political.
Politicians and bureaucrats can be just as prickly about sex as
about politics. In Singapore, prudes searched the hard disk of
computer systems to see if the good citizens were enjoying the
alt. sex newsgroups. And back in the States, Senator J. James Exon
of Nebraska concocted a nutty scheme to ban “indecent” material
from the public areas of the Net. 1984 once more came to mind. Big
Brother loathed sex, as Winston Smith, Orwell’s hero, knew all too
well in carrying on an illicit affair with a female bureaucrat.
Jim Exon also hated sex—at least on the Net. I could appreciate
his worries; did nine-year-olds really need to gawk at
alt. sex. bestiality, or kiddie porn, or the next Brandy’s Babes? Exon,
though, again and again, scrambled his facts. He relied partly on a
breathless article that the Washington Post had run under the
headline “Molesting Children by Computer. ” Among other things,
writer Sandy Rovner had advised parents to check their kids’
computers for files ending in “. BMP”. None other than the Microsoft
Windows software, however, left. BMP files on hard drives—as a way
to display images such as the corporate logo. Might Microsoft be a
new Sodom?
“Obviously I had not researched the story enough, ” Rovner
admitted to her great credit. “I am new to the world of
cyberspace.... I have a computer coach, but even he is behind on
the Internet. Yes, I violated a cardinal rule of journalism—I didn’t

know enough about what I was writing about. And I certainly wasn’t
thinking censorship. Mea culpa. I am a staunch supporter of the First
Amendment, as all journalists are or should be.” And yet Exon cited
“Molesting” on the Senate floor to justify his repressive, cyberspace-
oriented change in the existing Communications Decency Act.
“Argghh,” went Rovner.
Even more significantly, Exon, as noted earlier, failed to grasp the
difference between the Internet and television. Children wouldn’t
just flick on a computer and see a Madonna look-alike climaxing with
a German shepherd. They would have to look for pornography. And
the industry was ready to work on software, such as SurfWatch, to
help parents keep their kids out of pre-designated areas of the Net.
Nothing would be foolproof or teen-proof, of course. Brilliant
technologists had designed the Internet to survive 100-megaton H-
bombs. “The Net,” said the hacker John Gilmore in an oft-repeated
quote, “interprets censorship as damage and routes around it.”
Parents’ best response would be at home. Mothers and fathers
shouldn’t expect Uncle Sam to play nanny. As Steve Case, president
of America Online, noted in connection with his company, parents
should never turn their children loose in a city of millions of people.
And I believed that the same held true of the Internet. Why should
parents count on everything being constantly under control. Put the
Net on a leash short enough to suit Exon, and the pornography
would still persist—encrypted and on non-Net bulletin boards if
nothing else—but legitimate users would suffer. Some Internet
providers might even shut down to avoid legal liabilities. Moreover, in
an era of global commerce, Washington shouldn’t put America at
such a disadvantage. The losses in trade and jobs eventually would
reach the billions, given the estimated hundreds of billions of Net-
generated business.
“The only thing that censorship will do is drive the best and
brightest members of the U. S. Internet community to countries
where they can express themselves without risk of reprisal—and
drain the United States of its valuable intellectual capital,” Interactive
Publishing Alert’s Rosalind Resnick would later write.[6.6] “Personally
I’d rather see a few four-letter words flicker across my computer

screen every now and then than risk losing talented writers, artists
and programmers to our economic competitors.” A mother of two,
she counseled parents: “Keep the computer in a public area of the
house, such as the den or living room, not in your kid’s bedroom.
Warn your kids about the dangers of pedophiles and urge them
never to give out their phone number or address to anyone they
meet online.” That was a far better approach than Washington-
mandated net. censorship, one that could work with the smartest
hacker-child. Even the hyper Post article had played up similar
solutions. But Jim Exon couldn’t keep his hands off the Net.
In a superb illustration of the dark side of electronic democracy,
Exon held up a blue binder full of net. smut and, on the C-SPAN
television network, argued for censorship of cyberspace. The vote in
the Senate was 84 to 16—how could U. S. senators oppose
“decency?” Given all the sex scandals on the Hill, it was scene
worthy of Elmer Gantry, the Sinclair Lewis novel about a moralizing
preacher who nonetheless indulges in sex and booze. The book, of
course, ends with the Rev. Gantry promising, “We shall yet make
these United States a moral nation.”
Around the same time the Senate was hoping to Disneyize the
Internet, Bob Dole, the Republican majority leader, was protecting
Bob Packwood by opposing a move to open the Ethics Committee
hearings into the personal behavior of the oversexed senator from
Oregon. As reported by the Washington Post, Packwood allegedly
had grabbed and kissed scads of women—from campaign workers to
female staff members, lobbyists, a hotel clerk, and a baby-sitter
—“sometimes forcing his tongue into their mouth or fondling them.”
Packwood, while not owing up to every particular, had apologized for
being “terribly offensive to women.” And now he and Bob Dole had
voted for Draconian net. morality? Dole had even teamed up with
several other senators, including Charles Grassley, the champion of
snoop-friendly software, to offer a cyber-censor bill worse even than
Exon’s.
The ironies wouldn’t stop. None other than Donna Rice, whose
escapades with ex-Senator Gary Hart had helped kill off his political

career, was now praying and crusading against cyber smut—as a
spokeswoman for an antiporn group.
Another irony hit me. Tobacco and liquor advertisements, which
promote products far deadlier to children than any obscenities, were
reaching the Net. The Internet Sleuth, for example, one of my
favorite collections of Net indexes, had advertised Smokin’ Joe’s
tobacco products over a period of at least several weeks. And yet
the Exonians could not stop fixating on words and pictures, as
opposed to a massive, proven threat that had killed millions of
Americans. I didn’t want the government to ban even cancer-weed
ads from cyberspace, lest the regulators go wild and try to make the
Net TV-bland; but if Exon and allies had to crusade, they might as
well be consistent about it. Perhaps as a true children’s advocate,
Exon could even give back the more than $27,000 that his campaign
had collected between January 1989 and December 1994 from the
tobacco and liquor industries. That was just a fraction of his total
take, but a statement just the same. Maybe the operators of “adult”
bulletin board systems—who used the Net to post samples, the real
source of the problem—could befriend Exon-style pols with a well-
funded political-action committee. “PornoPAC”?
I wondered what would happen next if the net. censors won in the
House of Representatives. Earlier, in chapter 4, I had quoted Peter
Lewis of the New York Times as alluding to the “pencil-dicked geeks”
who flamed him. Would Washington let NetWorld! go out over an
Exonized Internet? This was the only time I had ever seen such
language in e-mail from Lewis, a gifted professional. Society didn’t
prevent a woodcarver from using a certain kind of wood just
because hoodlums might buy some baseball clubs made from it and
split each other’s skulls open. Why, then, draft legislation that so
despicably intruded on writers’ work? And what about teachers and
students of literature, including bright, stable teenagers under
eighteen? Or readers who just loved good, expressive writing?
Knowingly or not, the savages in the Senate could be banning even
Ulysses from the public area of the Internet. Never mind the
forthcoming age of electronic books; might Washington someday go
on to suppress the paper editions from stores and libraries?

Quite correctly the Electronic Frontier Foundation warned of the
folly of turning the public regions of the Internet into “the equivalent
of the Children’s Room at the public library,” and forcing Netfolks to
seek out “adult” areas. Get carried away on an Exonized Net, use
the wrong word, and the Feds could fine you up to $100,000 and jail
you for up to two years. Even in private e-mail you’d need to behave
yourself: You could not harass anyone with an “obscene” remark or
image, lest he or she report you. What if an ex-lover took innocent
comments and put them in the wrong context? Tough luck. Sooner
or later the courts would probably clean up after the politicians and
toss out the censorship, but that would hardly matter to the many
who suffered in the meantime.
In July 1995 the censorship debate was still at full blast. Just as
Jim Exon had relied on the misleading Post story, so did his side
brandish a sensationalistic Time magazine cover. A shocked, wide-
eyed child gaped at “CYBERPORN,” as the headline described it
“EXCLUSIVE: A new study shows how pervasive and wild it really is.
Can we protect our kids—and free speech?” Out of character, Philip
Elmer-DeWitt, one of the most Net-aware of all the reporters in the
mass media, had relied on a flawed paper out of Carnegie Mellon
University. The student perpetrator of the study, one Martin Rimm,
had overgeneralized, and two professors at Vanderbilt disemboweled
him with a 9,000-word rebuttal on the World Wide Web. If nothing
else, the Rimm study had blurred the distinction between bulletin
board systems and the Internet itself and also confused Usenet with
the Net as a whole.
Carnegie Mellon investigated whether Rimm had violated people’s
privacy. Most deliciously of all, however, from a Net perspective, he
had written something else—a self-published novel with such
picturesque terms as “rectum rocket.” Would that Sinclair Lewis and
H. L. Mencken had been around to chronicle the circus.
Over on the House side, Speaker Newt Gingrich sensibly let his
libertarian side prevail and opposed Exon. I wasn’t surprised. How
could Gingrich play nanny while railing in general against regulation
and bureaucracy, especially when he himself had set up shop as a
novelist? My fellow liberals, though, were amazed. It was as if they

were watching the T-Rex in Jurassic Park gobble up a velociraptor
that was about to enjoy a human snack.
Maybe the Exon-style proposals by now will have suffered the fate
of the smaller dinosaur, but similar lunacy is bound to break out
anew.[6.7] Among some on Capitol Hill, the urge to censor is as
powerful as the passion for reserved parking places.[6.8]
If the censors do win, their narrow-mindedness may backfire in
ways beyond the ones I’ve already described—and these risks will
only grow in the future, as the Net becomes still more international.
Puritanical countries such as Singapore might arbitrarily jail visiting
Americans who, from the States, had made Internet postings
deemed offensive by the standards of local dictators.[6.9] The
possibilities are endless. A U. S. novelist passing through a
Mideastern country could become the next Rushdie if the local
ayatollahs deemed his online work offensive.
Clinton’s Feds hardly helped when they went jurisdiction shopping
and prosecuted the owners of a California BBS for sex-related
material that violated community standards in Tennessee. Applied
internationally, the local-standards principle could send an American
to a sword-wielding executioner someday. The Bill of Rights, alas, is
just a U. S. phenomenon.
Exon You!
When the U. S. Senate passed Jim Exon’s
net. censorship bill, the journalist Brock Meeks
wrote a lead for the ages: “U. S. Capitol,
Senate Gallery—It’s all over. Fuck it.” But what
happens if net. censors prevail someday on
the House side, too (if they haven’t already),
and you can’t use the F word? Netfolks have
a solution:
Just substitute the last name of the senior
senator from Nebraska. Enemies and lovers
can then say, “Exon,” to each other.

That’s obvious. But the gifted trolls at
Bianca’s Smut Shack, spreading a post from
the mythical “Ezra Pound Is Innocent
Committee,” have actually promoted a whole
new lexicon in honor of Exon and allies. For
example:
Byrd: (noun) The posterior or hinderparts,
specifically the anus.
Coats: (noun) Excrement, or as a verb to
excrete.
Exon: (verb) To copulate with, the act of
copulation.
Gorton: (noun) The female genitals, or
specifically the vagina.
Gramm: (verb) To orgasm. Also colloquially
used as a noun.
Heflin: (noun) The female secondary sexual
characteristics.
Helms: (noun) The male phallus.
Specter: (noun) The clitoris.
However, a borderless Internet can also hinder the censorship
crowd. If American bluenoses such as Exon tried to restrict an
electronic Tropic of Cancer, for example, a U. S. publisher just might
set up shop in countries with less infantile politicians. People in the
States could then dial up the computer overseas.
Already the Net has made fools of martinets in the Canadian
government. Ottawa tried to squelch newspaper accounts of a
murder, claiming that the coverage would preclude a fair trial. So
people in the States sent electronic care packages to their Canadian
friends—articles from U. S. papers. Canadian officials banned a
pulped-wood issue of Wired for attacking their stupidity; that was
one of the biggest debacles of all, given the ease of dialing up

electronic versions of the magazine, one of the planet’s most
plugged-in publications.
Consider, too, the ramifications of anonymous servers, which strip
names and other identifiers from messages, allowing Netfolks to
circumvent legal bullying by governments and others. In 1995, the
Church of Scientology in Los Angeles got Finnish police to raid a
server in Helsinki that was posting anonymous exposés of this rather
litigious organization. The server survived. But the cops forced Johan
Helsingius, operator of the server, to reveal the name of a Church
enemy who originated the messages. “Now users fear their secrets
are at risk,” Time said of people using his computer service. Case
closed on anonymous servers? Hardly.
Within weeks after the incident I read a note from a hacker telling
how encrypted messages could wend their ways through chains of
anonymous e-mailers in several countries, with the names of the
senders remaining hidden unless most or all of the e-mailers broke
under pressure. Yes, abuses are possible, such as the release of
trade secrets, outright libels, forgeries, or the most vile and violent
of pornography. But how much better to live out this future than one
of the Orwellian variety. Tyrant-bashers in the Thirteen Colonies used
the wizardry of their day, the printing press, to agitate against the
Tories; now let’s hope that if Exonian politicians try to stifle the Net,
enough hackers will have their most dangerous presses ready to go,
the servers I’ve just described. Obsolete or not, the censors aren’t
going to stop.
Other Big Brotherish urges have surfaced. While some Power
People hope to be able to learn more about us by fighting PGP-style
programs, they are stymieing our efforts to learn more about them.
At the same time the Feds put online thousands of public documents
and even the visage of Bill Clinton’s cat, some politicians on the Hill
sought to weaken the Freedom of Information Act, which makes it
easier to dig up dirt on public officials. Just as important, Clinton
people in early 1995 were proposing new copyright laws that in
effect would discourage the intelligent discussion of public issues on
the Internet. It would be harder to share electronic newspaper clips.
Even more disturbingly, Clinton’s copyright policy could menace our

public library system in the future. Bruce Lehman, his czar of
intellectual property, was coming across as Andrew Carnegie in
reverse.
Carnegie is remembered as a Scot who grew rich off steel in the
States and who encouraged people throughout the world to start
libraries for all. He gave millions toward library buildings, with the
understanding that the local taxpayers would finance their support.
Carnegie wanted public libraries to be universities for the common
man, and the metaphor holds up. Today, without paying for college
or even for books, Americans can educate themselves on subjects
ranging from microcomputer chips to medieval history, to Alexis de
Tocqueville’s writings on democracy, to the case for or against
feminism or abortion or public broadcasting or capital punishment.
That is life in the era of paper books.
If Lehman had his wishes, however, Americans would not be able
to dial up copyrighted electronic library books from home by way of
the Internet Instead they would have to tote around CD-ROMs and
floppy disks.
William F. Buckley Jr. wrote that, in the era of the Internet, the
Lehman vision would be “the equivalent of requiring everyone who
listens to music to buy 78 rpm shellac records. What will the children
dial in to read? The collected speeches of Vice President Al Gore?
And believe it or not, there’s also talk of the Postal Service getting
involved in local public libraries through information kiosks.”[6.10] In
effect the White House approach would jack up the price of
independent, privately originated information, while making it easier
to obtain Washington-blessed information.
The information kiosks led some librarians to think of noses and
camel’s tents. For the Postal Service at one point said it would let
local librarians and citizens use the kiosks to retrieve only designated
categories of information, as opposed to, say, everything on the
World Wide Web. On a 1 to 10 scale of Big Brotherism, the kiosk
idea as originally proposed was an 8.5 or worse.[6.11] If the postal
bureaucrats weren’t trying to be Big Brother in the strictest sense—
and no, they weren’t—then they at least were unwittingly paving the
way for him.

Worse, the Postal Service has talked of issuing tens of millions of
“U. S. Cards” that would “mediate all government services and
controls over citizens, ” while at the same time an Internal Revenue
Service official has proposed a system that would file our tax returns
[ 6. 12 ] for us. I hate both ideas. Rather than compiling Orwellian
dossiers on citizens, governments should help us computerize via
TeleRead-style programs so we can more easily do the “paperwork”
ourselves by way of electronic forms. Investigators could audit the
forms, but only under appropriate circumstances. How much better
this would be—not just e-books, but electronic empowerment
against bureaucracy—than the vision that Washington and other
governments have in mind for us.
Perhaps the Lehman idea and the Postal and IRS plans will have
been beaten back or rendered harmless by now. Whatever happens,
though, it is clear that new technology may harm both privacy and
democracy if our vigilance lapses.
The threat of electronic oligarchy, stanching the free flow of facts
that intelligent nonmillionaires demand, is hardly unique to the
States. In the United Kingdom, for example, The Times Higher
Education Supplement has warned against a copyright regime that
would be a paradise for read-o-meter companies but a nightmare to
people valuing free libraries. Just like Lehman’s proposal in the U. S.,
the wrong laws in the U. K. could lead to a Copyright Gestapo; let’s
hope that neither country will criminalize one of the prerequisites for
democracy: curiosity.
Given the global nature of both encryption technology and
copyright law, the whole world should be watching Washington’s
policies. The Clinton Administration, after all, hopes to
internationalize the same mindset that could send Phil Zimmermann
to jail; in fact, many of the American export controls are in effect in
other countries, raising the possibility that an Australian or a British
hacker could end up someday in the same predicament. In the
pages that follow I’ll tell about the battles that Zimmermann and his
allies have fought with Washington.
You’ll read, too, of my fight for an alternative to the Lehmanesque
copyright law. My little case history suggests that the White House is

not so eager to listen to ordinary mortals who speak up on the Net.
Clinton’s people would rather pander to the usual campaign
contributors. So far at least, pious rhetoric notwithstanding, they
have basically neglected the need to put the public library system
online with free or low-cost books from the private sector. Video just
might end up reigning even more supreme than it does today—at
the expense of abstract thought and democracy. Winston Smith
would not be happy.
PGP and the Fight
for Privacy
—and
Against Clipper—
on the
Internet
Father Bill Morton, an Anglican priest in Woodstock, New
Brunswick, could take confessions via e-mail without violating his
vows. Encryption software guarded the privacy of his
communications. In Florida a bright teenager without any vices—but
with a nosy mother—could protect her diaries. And in New York, an
employee of a leading investment house could routinely guard his
credit card number. The same software made it possible for
thousands to use the Net for confidential business transactions. At
the same time, democratic activists in the former Soviet Union would
be able protect their messages if tyranny returns.
The name for this encryption package was PGP and by 1995 it was
as much a cause as a program. Thousands had downloaded it off
the Internet and other networks. Named in tribute to Ralph’s Pretty
Good Grocery on Garrison Keillor’s radio show, PGP stood for Pretty
Good Privacy. PGP lived up to its name—people needed it. Part of

the reason was the nature of the Net itself. A skilled hacker could
intercept unencrypted e-mail more easily than on the regular
commercial networks. Mail often passed through computers at a
number of universities and companies before reaching its
destination. Without question the best way to protect the contents of
your outgoing mail was to scramble its message before you sent it
into cyberspace.
PGP was also popular because its use showed that the Net would
never accept Clipper chip encryption schemes—designed to make it
easier for the government to snoop on citizens.
Not surprisingly, then, at the time I was writing this book, Phil
Zimmermann was a hero to many on the Internet. His program
meant dignity. It meant safer commerce on the Net. Other privacy
protection programs existed, but his was most popular, making it all
the more useful. So when the Feds threatened Zimmermann, many
people correctly felt as if Washington were attacking them along the
way. The irony was that the federal government’s policies against
safe encryption could actually threaten world security and had
already set back efforts on behalf of computer security.
In a sense the PGP story was part of a continuum, and not just
because the Egyptians had scrambled messages four thousand years
ago or because encryption had been a staple of Cold Warriors.
Even while growing up in Miami and Fort Lauderdale, Phil
Zimmermann had tinkered with secret codes. At around age ten he
had learned Morse code, Braille, and, via lemon juice, invisible ink.
By his teens he was building code wheels; at Florida Atlantic
University, he kept up his passion for puzzles and secrets. He started
out there in physics; switched to computer science; married; packed
up for Boulder, Colorado, where he became a computer consultant;
and thought of a move to New Zealand. Phil Zimmermann believed it
would be safer, in the event of nuclear war, than Ground Zero
countries.
Instead of leaving the States, however, Zimmermann decided to
stay and help throttle back the military. Along with the astronomer
Carl Sagan and Daniel Ellsberg of Pentagon Papers fame—and
hundreds of others—Zimmermann was arrested at testing grounds in

Nevada. Soon his love of computers would be converging with his
distrust of people in uniforms.
Zimmermann in the early ’80s was selling a gadget that plugged
into an Apple II computer but used an 8088 chip just like the then-
new IBM personal computer. This gadget was designed to allow
people to keep their old Apple hardware and software while running
new programs for the fast new chip. Zimmermann called his
company Metamorphic Systems. A programmer from Arkansas saw a
Metamorphic ad and called Zimmermann to pitch to him an
encryption system that was too long to run on most machines.
Would Zimmermann care to adapt the system to run on an 8088
chip? He would.[6.13]
RSA was the encryption method here. Named after its three
originators—Ronald Rivert, Adi Shamir, and Len Adleman—RSA was a
virtually uncrackable form of public key encryption. So what did
public key mean? Well, you didn’t have to worry about the wrong set
of eyes seeing the jumble of letters and other characters that made
up keys for messages transmitted to you. You could freely spread it
around. Then someone who wanted to send something confidential
to you didn’t have to contact you for a secret key known only to you.
He could use your public key by way of his RSA software.
Simply put, the public key approach did away with a major
problem: how to send descrambling tools over networks if the
information itself wasn’t secured. People who didn’t know each other
could trade public keys, then share secrets from the start. They
could even use the same software to verify their identities with the
help of trusted third parties, who “signed” the keys with sequences
of their own. Imagine the many possibilities for allowing safe
business transactions on networks between strangers. A lucrative
business just might await Zimmermann if he added his own wrinkles.
With RSA, however, came a series of legal nightmares for
Zimmermann. Starting work on his own software using RSA, he
hadn’t any idea at the start that Rivert, Shamir, and Adleman would
be claiming a patent on it.
The trio farmed their rights out to RSA Data Security and,
eventually, Public Key Partners. Jim Bidzos, negotiating for RSA, in

many ways stood out as a political and philosophical opposite of
Zimmermann. Bidzos carried a Greek passport for business reasons
but at the same time felt patriotic enough to have volunteered for
the U. S. Marines. The way Bidzos tells the story (to Simson
Garfinkel, author of PGP: Pretty Good Privacy), Zimmermann asked
for a “free license” for use of RSA. “When I told him ‘No,’” Bidzos
said, “he was really upset. He told me that he was behind on his
mortgage payments and that he had invested years in writing this
piece of software.” Bidzos said he suggested that Zimmermann try
licensing the patent from a larger company.[6.14]
Zimmermann’s own side of the story differed starkly—in 1991 he
wrote Jim Bidzos a letter saying that Bidzos and Ron Rivert had told
him that “you would grant me a free license to make and sell
products with your algorithm.”[6.15] A few years later he would note
to the Wall Street Journal that he hadn’t sold PGP before his contract
with ViaCrypt, one of RSA’s licensees.[6.16] He steadfastly maintained
he had not broken any laws. Many on the Internet would have
agreed, if for no other reason than that they considered software
patents to be abominations. Without patents to limit them, many
programmers felt they could be more creative. Their ethos was quite
in line with the traditional Net ethos. The predecessor of the
Internet, after all, hadn’t just been started to allow the Pentagon to
survive nukes. It also existed to share knowledge.
By 1991 the patent issue wasn’t the only one dogging
Zimmermann. The U. S. Senate was considering a law that would in
effect ban Fedproof encryption here in the United States and
potentially prevent him from selling the software on which he had
been toiling for years now. Washington already forbade export of
encryption abroad. The Cold War was winding down, but export
controls were still draconian. Hadn’t we won World War II because
our technology was better, because we had had nukes, because we
could even snoop on secret code transmissions from the enemy?
The export laws and the Pentagon put strong encryption equipment
in the same category as munitions.
But what about at home? Not surprisingly, the FBI didn’t want the
wrong technology to fall into the hands of dope rings, Mafiosi, and

others planning or coordinating crimes. In 1991, then, perhaps at
the Bureau’s request, Senator Joseph Biden of Delaware inserted the
following language into an omnibus crime bill: “It is the sense of
Congress that providers of electronic communications services and
manufacturers of electronic communications service equipment shall
ensure that communications systems permit the government to
obtain the plain text contents of voice, data, and other
communications when appropriately authorized by law.”
A Senate staffer assured civil libertarians that the measure would
not ban strong encryption. Many disagreed. Computer Professionals
for Social Responsibility, library groups, academics, and industry
managed to get Washington to drop the offending language.
By then PGP was all over the Net. Smart lobbying, not the
software, killed the Biden plan. But Zimmermann’s work was still a
good, sound precaution against a relapse. Via bulletin boards and
the Internet, a free version was circulating from one end of Planet
Earth to the other, having gone overseas within a day of its release.
In Zimmermann’s words, it spread “like thousands of dandelion
seeds blowing in the wind.” PGP reached Russia and scores of other
countries. It wasn’t like nuclear weapons or mini-computers; you
couldn’t stop a ship from loading or search the luggage of the
suspicious. No, PGP just moved silently over the wires as hackers
throughout the world shared Zimmermann’s craft. The way
Zimmermann told it, however, he had not broken any of the export
laws. And others supported him.
Jim Warren, founder of InfoWorld and a software man respected
for his civic activism on the Net, would later recall that Zimmermann
gave PGP to an acquaintance named Kelly Goen, who “studiously”
limited the uploads to electronic bulletin boards and Internet sites
within the United States. Warren was aware of the uploading
process while it happened. “The whole idea was to provide it to
Americans,” he would remember, “so Americans could have personal
privacy and security” in case the U. S. Senate tried to bottle up
decent encryption.[6.17]
The National Security Agency—the secret agency that dealt with
many of the best cryptographers and dominated the encryption

scene in the United States—did not complain formally when PGP first
hit the Net. And Zimmermann fretted. Had his baby failed to
safeguard privacy enough to worry the National Security Agency?
[6.18]
Back at RSA Data Security, Jim Bidzos wasn’t thrilled when PGP
appeared with RSA technology. He maintained that PGP violated
both patent and export law, and at his urging, some commercial
services and universities banished PGP from their servers.[6.19]
Legally, Bidzos may or may not have been justified. But once again
the hacker ethic prevailed on the Net. Not everyone online took
Zimmermann’s side, but by now he was a serious hero to a group of
encryption boosters known as “Cypherpunks,” the name that a
magazine writer had once given them as a joke.
Many of the Cypherpunks were libertarians, or variants thereof,
and they believed in perfect privacy. The punks were to encryption
laws what the National Rifle Association was to restrictions on
firearms.
Along with scores of corporations, not just people whom the White
House might dismiss as fringe, the Cypherpunks wanted to use
encryption to protect digital money. They envisioned a society in
which bits and bytes—representing cash—could pass from person to
person without Party A knowing Party B’s identity. The Cypherpunks
were smart, and often very right. Frustrating for others, but
rewarding for them, they tested the tolerance of the most ardent
Voltaireans.
Tim May was among the punk leaders. He had once worked for
Intel, the chip maker. As Steven Levy put it in an article for Wired,
May had “‘retired’ at 34 with stock options sufficient to assure that
he would never flip a burger for Wendy’s.” He in some ways came
across as the Internet’s Abbie Hoffman, say, or Jerry Rubin. Baby
boomers will forever recall these bearded crazies of the 1960s who
ran a pig for president and protested materialism by going to Wall
Street and scattering money around.
May did not mind getting rich. But he had something of his own to
scatter in cyberspace. It was a series of taunts that appeared at the
bottom of the many messages he posted to the Net: “Crypto

Anarchy: encryption, digital money, anonymous networks, digital
pseudonyms, zero knowledge, reputations, information markets,
black markets, collapse of governments.” If Washington had rigged
up a machine to scan the Net and measure people by levels of
subversion, May would have blown out all the lights and needles.
And one of his programs of choice, as advertised amid the other
subversion? PGP, what else?
Timothy May and other Cypherpunks over the next few years
would tap out thousands of messages, exchanging technical tips,
dreaming up new forms of crypto madness, rallying support for
encryption and for Phil Zimmermann. This was a whole subculture
with a language and an ethics code of its own. Sometimes the
Cypherpunks fought among themselves. Later a punk in Colorado
“spoofed” Timothy May and, using May’s Internet address, posted
malarkey all over the Net. But true to his anarchistic leanings, May
did not press for the dissident’s expulsion from the punk mailing list.
Back in November 1992 the punks may have breathed a little
easier. George Bush lost the election. No longer would the president
be a Republican, a World War II veteran, and a former director of
the Central Intelligence Agency. Bill Clinton was a baby boomer. He
had spoken out against Vietnam, he had avoided the draft, he liked
Fleetwood Mac, he played a saxophone, and his vice presidential
candidate had made a name as a loyal supporter of advanced
computer networks. So perhaps the Feds would back off on
Zimmermann. At the very least maybe the security bureaucracy
would face a long delay while the Clinton people puzzled out what to
do.
Clinton’s sax and the rest did not count, however; in encryption
matters he might as well have been a ninety-nine-year-old fan of
Lawrence Welk. Within just a few weeks of the inauguration, two
men from the U. S. Customs Department were quizzing Phil
Zimmermann. According to the book PGP: Pretty Good Privacy, they
said Jim Bidzos had described PGP as a rip-off of the RSA approach.
Following the Zimmermann interview, Customs pressed ahead
both on the patent front and on export law issues. Zimmermann,
however, denied having swiped PGP from anyone, and he said

patent matters should be between him and Bidzos, not between him
and Customs. At the time the Feds told him he was not the target of
an investigation.[6.20]
Soon, however, two subpoenas suggested that Washington was
still quite eager to justify any and all of the Cypherpunk’s paranoia.
One subpoena went to Austin Code Works, which sold public-
domain software that contained some of Zimmermann’s work.
Washington struck out. It had been seeking evidence of overseas
sales, and Austin lacked any in this case. Zimmermann hadn’t even
sold Austin his work directly.[6.21]
Washington was more lucky at ViaCrypt, a company in Arizona,
where the subpoena stuck. Zimmermann had just given ViaCrypt a
PGP license. Now he indeed would be under investigation. In PGP:
Pretty Good Privacy, Simson Garfinkel observed that RSA Data did
not win similar honors even though it had placed encryption-related
software on the Internet. Nor did Internet providers such as Netcom,
which stored PGP on computers that people overseas could reach.
[6.22] Bill Clinton’s people were letting foreigners dial up this export-
controlled software again and again. Needless to say, the bullying of
Zimmermann still made the industry nervous—who was next?
As if the Clinton White House hadn’t sinned enough, it was about
to embarrass itself in a high-tech version of the Bay of Pigs. That’s
how critics regarded a nitwit scheme to control encryption and
discourage the public from using good software such as PGP. The
Bay of Pigs, a cuckoo plan for the invasion for Cuba, was a legacy
that had come to John F. Kennedy from the Eisenhower
Administration. The odds would have delighted no one but a
masochistic squad of kamikaze pilots. Castro crushed a small band of
Cuban exiles who showed up on Washington’s behalf at the Bay of
Pigs. Like the debacle on the Cuban beaches, the Clipper chip was
really another Republican leftover. The national security apparatus
hadn’t been able to con the Bush Administration into implementing
Clipper before the election. But Bill Clinton himself lacked the guts to
resist the NSA.
“No Such Agency,” as Washington wags called it, operated out of
Fort Meade, Maryland, near the Chesapeake Bay, perhaps explaining

its fondness for assigning nautical names to encryption plans. Many
billions of tax money had gone into the NSA over the years.
Thousands worked for it. And they weren’t just interested in the
survival of the United States. They wanted job security. Clipper was
going to be a meal ticket. Just as some wishful planners had deluded
themselves into thinking that a small band of men could tame Cuba,
now the NSA was telling Bill Clinton’s people that it could use Clipper
to control the world of encryption.
All those irksome constitutional details aside, the NSA’s plan might
actually have made sense once. The people at Fort Meade had done
the United States a service by staying ahead of Soviet encryption in
the era of tail fins and air raid drills. But today such an approach was
about as appropriate as a backyard bomb shelter. As far back as the
1970s, two men outside NSA’s control had invented public key
encryption, which, as noted before, was a good way for strangers to
exchange secure messages and authenticate their identities from the
start. Whitfield Diffie was a mathematician, computer scientist, and
encryption expert. Martin Hellman was an electronic engineer. Both
were grouchy about a computer system whose users had to entrust
their passwords to the systems managers. So they came up with
public key encryption—the same principle that was behind the RSA
approach used in PGP, and now available from Boston to Brisbane.
Even Bill Clinton couldn’t repeal the past. Just as the Kennedy
Administration had justified Castro’s paranoia, so the Clinton
Administration worked hard to do the same with that of the
Cypherpunks. This time Washington wouldn’t deploy humans.
Instead it wanted to rely on a little computer chip that Steven Levy
described as “just another tiny square of plastic covering a silicon
thicket.”
“Tumor-sized” might have been more apropos. Clipper, in fact, was
a tumor of sorts.
In a human body a tumor serves itself, not its host. And that’s
what Clipper was supposed to do. The Clinton Administration wanted
to license Clipper to the private sector, where it would show up in
millions of telephones and dominate the market—displacing future
encryption schemes based on technologies such as PGP. Washington

hoped to make Clipper too cheap to resist and to provide a federal
market for Clipper products. AT&T and the rest could put Clipper in
telephones, and then, supposedly, dope peddlers couldn’t peddle
and terrorists couldn’t terrorize without the Feds having a chance to
intercept their conversations. The government would also work to
make computers snoop friendly.
That was the scenario. Like tumors these government-issue chips
were to spread—not only in the States but also overseas. Eventually
the Feds would also announce plans to make Clipper available
through software, rather than just through the chip. Whatever the
incarnation of Clipper, though, Washington would play down the fact
that it would corrode the country’s constitutional right to privacy.
America’s Winston Smiths would have to trust a government that
had covered up an unhealthy number of deaths from nuclear fallout,
given us Watergate, and illegally spied on thousands of Americans.
An old friend of mine, Margaret “Peggy” Engel, a former
Washington Post reporter who ran and still runs a respected
journalism foundation, was among the snoops’ victims. Bureaucrats
got the phone company to turn over a list of Peggy’s calls even
though she had not committed a crime. It seems a freelance writer
had managed to dig up some inside information on the failure of the
IRS to collect several billion dollars in back taxes from corporations
that had profited from currency hedging. This same writer later
applied for a grant from Engel’s organization, the Alicia Patterson
Foundation. Vindictively, the Feds snooped on Engel, too, simply
because the writer had made a call to Engel’s office for an
application for a fellowship.
So it went. Because Peggy and I talked from time to time, the
Feds had also tracked her telephone and computer calls to me. They
acted against her under a casually issued court order signed not by
a judge but by an assistant deputy clerk—one of more than 20,000
such actions issued in the Washington area in 1992. “It’s like getting
your parking ticket stamped,” she told me. “That’s the level of
scrutiny that these things get. And the number keeps growing. I
think it’s because of the increase in fax machines. I think agencies
are using it on their employees to find out who talked to the press or

Congress.” And now the Feds wanted to license the manufacture of a
chip that would spill our secrets on demand.
Granted, the Feds claimed that in the Clipper’s case, one
bureaucrat could not spy alone. The official line was that people
from both the Treasury Department and the National Institute for
Standards and Technology would have to agree before an
interception could take place. If they did, the electronic keys would
go over the wires to local police or others needing the tap. All this
would require a court order. Some Clipper boosters might well have
argued, “We’re talking about strict controls.” But Peggy’s experience
still showed the potential the Feds had for promiscuous Big
Brothering, especially since both the Treasury and the Institute were
within the Executive Branch.
Later the front pages would sprout articles about bureaucrats
reading the supposedly confidential tax information of their
neighbors or of movie stars. Yes, the tax people tightened up their
operations to avoid repeats. But supposedly the IRS had been
secure in the first place.
The NSA might itself prove capable of some nasty twists. What if it
could call up escrow keys from a database despite all talk to the
contrary? Or suppose it had a database of its own to unlock all the
keys? Would it really want to go to court for authority to snoop? In
PGP: Pretty Good Privacy, Garfinkel wisely noted that Washington
would let Clipper chips be exported. And the NSA was allowed to spy
on nondomestic conversations. So he logically wrote: “If Clipper-
equipped radios were being used by Iraqi fighter pilots, the NSA
would want to listen in. Although the NSA hasn’t said so publicly, it is
doubtful that the agency would jeopardize national security in order
to play along with the escrow system.” The NSA might even work
out secret deals with the company making the chips, to assure that
the results didn’t frustrate the snoops.
Adding to the quite-justified paranoia was the fact that only the
dumbest of criminals would rely on Clipper to protect privacy. So
what was the point of using technology meant to turn the bad guys
into jail bait? Why bother to create it in the first place?

Washington countered that criminals would want Clipper phones
to talk securely to the world at large. And I suspected that, yes, they
indeed would buy some equipment with Clipper. But for plotting a
$10 million dope shipment or a terrorist attack, the black hats would
quickly learn to use other scrambling systems; in fact, they could run
them on top of Clipper so the Feds still got only gibberish. Even if
the Feds banned PGP-style protection, criminals would spread the
right hardware and software among themselves. Like drugs or sex,
this would be a fine opportunity for entrepreneurial lawbreakers.
The underworld might even sell Clipper-crackers that could make
criminals just as good at snooping on America’s Winston Smiths as
the Feds would be. High-tech hoods could call their new business
Credit Card Numbers Unlimited. Small wonder that Clipper appalled
many security specialists.
At the same time, experts for the software industry raised
questions about whether the Clipper chip could penetrate the market
and, if so, to what extent? Any way you looked at it, the plan was
crazy. If Clipper couldn’t catch criminals (and did everyone in the
White House really swallow this bilge?), then who was left? People
like Peggy Engel, her muckraking grantee, and me. At least part of
the time, we would need Clipperish encryption if somehow it
surprised the experts and did catch on; our banks might not let us
use anything else. How much better if a PGP-style alternative were
the standard instead.
Technically, Clipper was just as scary as it was politically and in
law-enforcement terms. Scientists and mathematicians loved to
dissect encryption schemes in academic papers, and keep checking
and rechecking them over the years for flaws. But Clipper’s
designers withheld the information that outside experts could use to
poke holes in the concept. Unknowns indeed existed. A well-
connected scientist at AT&T would later find a significant weakness
in the network version of Clipper, a way to cripple the snoop-on-me-
please feature.
All in all, Clipper actually emerged as a world security threat.
Washington was harming electronic commerce by promoting a
crippled and questionable program for encryption. The

Administration in effect was delaying the adoption of truly
comprehensive security standards for the international community,
especially business people outside the States. The standards were
on the way, but not as fast as if Clinton’s people hadn’t wreaked
havoc on the private sector by way of moronic export controls.
“We need strong cryptography for mainstream society on the Net,”
Zimmermann told me. “It’s like making locks. It’s as if I were in the
business of selling very, very strong locks.” He reminded me of the
case of Kevin Mitnick, who was arrested for breaking into scads of
computers and stealing oceans of valuable information. The FBI
chased him for a couple of years. “Isn’t it ironic that this guy was
able to inflict such damage because our systems are so insecure?”
Zimmermann asked. “Our own government suppressed the
availability of strong encryption technology. They brought it on
themselves, or, I should say more accurately, they brought it down
on us.”
At the same time, through Clipper and through efforts against PGP
and other effective software, Washington in effect was lending moral
support to dictatorships. Clipper used a technique called key escrow.
That was a nice way of saying you had to trust Uncle with your
secrets since he had a copy of your key. But what if Uncle weren’t
Uncle Sam? What if he instead were Uncle Saddam?
“You may have the Saddam Husseins of the world, the North
Koreans, being able to hang on to power,” Zimmermann said, “by
using this technology to oppress their own political opposition.”
Clipper could do harm even in countries friendly to the United
States. Washington wanted them to adopt Clipper-style standards.
And at the very least the Clinton Administration was encouraging
these governments to demand the keys to whatever encryption
schemes their citizens used. That could boomerang mightily against
American companies doing business outside the States. Phil
Zimmermann recounted to me a rumor he’d heard about a giant
entertainment conglomerate that had negotiated a huge deal in
France; its executives found the French to be uncannily prescient
about the Americans’ tactics. The espionage rumor might or might
not be accurate. But fear of French spying against Yanks was

common enough for many people from U. S. firms to be very careful
about what they said on the telephone, or where they left their
suitcases. The French had prohibited strong cryptography. And the
Clipper plan, while not a ban on decent encryption, certainly
deprived American companies of the moral foundations they needed
to protest the French law. In the long run a Clipper arrangement
might indeed pave the way for a ban in the United States itself
against PGP-strength products, and already it could prop up such
moves abroad, to the great disadvantage of American companies
with secrets to protect.
In another way, too, Clipperish approaches would make U. S.
companies less competitive. American software firms wanted to build
encryption into spreadsheets, databases, word processors, and other
major applications. If the Feds bullied them into using Clipper, then
their products would be less attractive than those of rivals. Consider
the market for software to store sensitive material such as medical
records; would a European hospital favor a crippled American
program over a German program with robust encryption?
That wasn’t so abstract a question. An engineer from the giant
Siemens conglomerate in Germany told me later that he was
working on medical software, and he expected his employer to
clobber U. S. rivals if their products used a questionable, Clipperish
encryption scheme. What’s more, crypto mavens were common
enough overseas for even American companies to think about hiring
them in the former Soviet Union to bypass the export controls. If it
happened, it would be the ultimate statement on the absurdity of
both the controls and Clipper.
Not surprisingly, a great hue and cry against Clipper came from
the American software industry, and meanwhile the hackers
themselves were waging full-scale warfare against it on the Net.
Thousands of Netfolks participated in the anti-Clipper activities of
groups such as the Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility,
the first group to sound the tocsin.
In 1994, however, as clueless as ever, the White House officially
endorsed Clipper—no ifs ands or buts—and made arrangements for
the production of the chips. “Encryption is a law-and-order issue

since it can be used by criminals to thwart wiretaps and avoid
detection and prosecution,” Al Gore said in justifying Clipper. “It also
has huge strategic value. Encryption technology and cryptoanalysis
turned the tide in the Pacific and elsewhere during World War II.”
But exactly. People on the Net thought that Clipper was just plain
brain-dead as a way to protect security, a triumph of bureaucrats
over techies.
You even didn’t have to be on the Net to hate the tumor chip. At
the request of Time and CNN, Yankelovich Partners polled 1,000
Americans; did they think that private phone calls mattered more
than wiretap powers for police? Four-fifths opposed Clipper.
Newspapers churned out editorial after editorial, and with good
cause: Imagine the joys of trying to expose government corruption if
the biggest crooks on the public payroll might someday be able to
monitor your conversations whenever they wanted.
Quite properly, then, most citizens did not trust Washington.
Hackers wore sweatshirts that played on a slogan that Intel used to
promote computers using its chips. Alluding to Clipper, the
sweatshirts read, “Big Brother Inside.” Tens of thousands of people
on the Net lent their names to an anti-Clipper petition originated by
Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility. John Perry Barlow,
the Grateful Dead lyricist who cofounded the Electronic Frontier
Foundation, told how snoopy Feds would have to kill him and pry his
private PGP key from his “cold, dead fingers.” Through it all, meg
after meg of messages went out over the Net—everything from
sophomoric diatribes to carefully reasoned pleas for anti-Clipper
letters to local members of Congress.
After questioning some arguments against Clipper, one man found
himself vilified all over the Net, complete with a lie that he had made
a homosexual advance against a hacker. The privacy movement was
supposed to defend Americans’ right to dissent, not enforce its own
form of alternative orthodoxy. I felt grumpy, then, about the smear.
But that was a relatively rare incident; typical opposition to Clipper
was passionate but high minded.
Except for the smear described above, the meanest statements
came not from Clipper foes but from Stewart A. Baker, a PGP critic

who was about to return to private practice after serving as chief
counsel for the National Security Agency. Wired commendably let
Baker give his side. The magazine did so “with all the enthusiasm,”
Baker wrote, “of Baptist ministers turning their Sunday pulpits over
to the Devil.”
Understandably Baker began by denying that Clipper would
“create a brave new world of government intrusion into the privacy
of Americans.” Baker said that key escrow would merely maintain
Washington’s rights to do wire-taps as presently authorized. That
was a wrong; the government actually was going out of its way to
make us all tap ready, as if we were back in the old Soviet Union in
the KGB era. But at least in this case Baker wasn’t maligning the
Net. The nastiness oozed out later when his article took on “Myth
Number Two: Unreadable encryption is the key to our future liberty.”
Baker shrugged off such reasoning as “the long-delayed revenge of
people who couldn’t go to Woodstock because they had too much
trig homework. It reflects a wide—and kind of endearing—streak of
romantic high-tech anarchism that crops up throughout the
computer world.” Then he let loose against PGP-style programs itself.
“Some argue that widespread availability of this encryption will help
Latvian freedom fighters today and American freedom fighters
tomorrow.” Presumably thousands of PGP boosters were hunkered
down making bombs in Manhattan basements.
Having tried to ignore the legitimate uses of PGP by thousands of
peaceful, law-abiding citizens, Baker then told how “a high-tech
pedophile in Santa Clara, California, had a PGP-encrypted diary of
his contacts with susceptible young boys using computer bulletin
boards all over the country.” Oh. So between overthrowing the
government, PGP users would be seducing eight-year-olds. Baker
huffed that “if unescrowed encryption becomes ubiquitous, there will
be many more stories like this.”
Poor Baker. If he’d really wanted to do his attacks right, he could
have quoted with full grimness the writings that Timothy May, the
Cypherpunk, had posted on the Net in the spirit of Jerry Rubin and
Abbie Hoffman.

May was the author of a long, detailed, sometimes even Talmudic
list of frequently asked questions and answers on cryptography and
the fight for privacy, which might or might not have been on the Net
at the time Baker was writing his Wired piece. But if not, he could
have found equivalent thoughts among May’s many postings to the
Cypherpunks’ rather public list. Laying out the case against strong
encryption programs in the PGP vein, May conjectured that they
could make killing for hire much more practical. People using
encryption could rely on trusted agents who dispensed anonymous
digital cash. “There are some ways to reduce the popularity of this
Murder Incorporated system,” May said, and kindly assured readers
that he had been thinking about them.

For good measure May noted that racists such as the Aryan Nation
were using encryption, and “other kinds of terrorists” might be
relying on it as well. “Expect more uses in the future, as things like
PGP continue to spread.” As if that weren’t enough to pull
bureaucrats’ chains, May said: “Many of us are explicitly anti-
democratic and hope to use encryption to undermine the so-called
democratic governments of the world.”
May, ever the idea juggler, also weighed in with some powerful
arguments for PGP that appealed strongly to a stodgy old Democrat
(small “d” as well) like me. Even the Feds should have grasped
them. “Could strong crypto be used for sick and disgusting and
dangerous purposes?” May asked. And then he answered himself:
“So can locked doors, but we don’t insist on an ‘open door policy’
(outside of certain quaint sorority and rooming houses!). So do
many forms of privacy allow plotters, molesters, racists, etc., to meet
and plot.” Whatever May was, anarchist, libertarian, objectivist, or
nothing, he was making more sense in those three sentences than
Baker could have in a 1,000 essays.
After May signed up for Cyberia, a legally oriented list, he was one
of the favorite nonlawyers there, winning friends even among those
who disagreed with his politics. In one limited way he may have
been more threatening to Washington than Hoffman or Rubin, for,
rather than just ranting and raving and putting on a good show, he
could communicate all too cogently with members of the
establishment. At the same time the Feds were fixating on
Zimmermann, May casually told the lawyers how he moved in and
out of the country without letting Washington veto his speeches on
encryption. In effect his gleeful confession made mockery of the
laws. If D. C. couldn’t even control a traveler—there in flesh and
blood—how could it monitor electrons speeding over the phone
wires?
“I myself just presented a paper on ‘Crypto Anarchy and Virtual
Communities’ in Monte Carlo,” May told the cyberlawyers, at least
one of whom was an attorney from the Justice Department. “I
described algorithms, methods, etc., and was never asked or
instructed to submit to the Men in Black in D. C.” He was even

carrying around “several gigabytes of code, essays, programs.” But
never was he “ever stopped, questioned, or searched. Only upon
landing in San Francisco was I asked to state my business overseas.
I said I was meeting with cryptographers from around the world!
This was met with confusion by the twenty-two-year-old Customs
officer; but after asking if any of them were from Russia or Iraq, and
I told him I had no idea if there were or not, he waved me through.”
May said most U. S. cryptographers “just shrug and ignore the
possibility that our papers may be illegal to present outside the U. S.”
His observations came as the Electronic Frontier Foundation was
trying to resolve matters in a more tidy way. It was sponsoring a
lawsuit to prevent Washington from restricting the spread of
encryption-related writing and software. Quite correctly the EFF
argued that the encryption laws were an “impermissible prior
restraint on speech, in violation of the First Amendment.” An EFF
victory, needless to say, could nuke the government’s case against
Zimmermann.
With Hooverian tenacity, as if Phil Zimmermann were Dillinger or a
godfather, Washington kept up its harassment and even escalated it
in some ways. Jim Warren saw this happen firsthand. He had asked
to testify several years ago in Zimmermann’s defense, but the
authorities ignored his request. Then in 1995 he had published op-
ed pieces in San Jose and San Francisco papers, in which he
throttled the FBI and NSA for getting in the way of the best possible
security on the Net. In the wake of the Mitnick break-ins, he had
accused the Feds of “endangering millions of innocent citizens and
law-abiding businesses that use the Net or cell phones, in order to
protect their ability to monitor the few who might be guilty of
something.” Almost immediately two U. S. Customs agents favored
Warren with a surprise visit to his house and quizzed him about
Zimmermann and PGP. “When they began the interview,” he said,
“they handed me a subpoena that said I was ‘COMMANDED to
appear and testify before the Grand Jury of the United States District
Court’ in San Jose.“[6.23]
“Who says government isn’t responsive,” Warren quipped.

He said this in a folksy newsletter sent to hundreds of people on
the Net. Its well-earned name was Government Access; he had been
the main organizer of a successful campaign to get California to put
legislative information on the Internet for free. As much as anyone
he was trying to work within The System. Yet he was ever skeptical
toward “Congress Critters.” Again and again Warren’s newsletter in
effect depicted a Washington that could be Torylike in its contempt
toward Netfolk.
Warren didn’t just write of the well-publicized threats like the Exon
bill, or the Clinton Administration’s prosecution of a couple in
California because their sex-oriented BBS did not come up to Bible
Belt community standards in Tennessee, or the Zimmermann case
itself. Warren also wrote of obscure people such as a Berkeley-area
hacker who, enraged by restrictions on encryption and by other
actions in the vein of King George’s Stamp Act, had fled to Sweden.
“Sweden is no paradise,” the expatriate told Warren via e-mail,
“but I don’t ever worry that the government is going to break into
my home. I know that I’ll be able to run my BBS, maintain all the
contacts I’ve developed over the years, and continue to use the
various nets without fear of Uncle Sam attacking me. So now I’m
trading in my U. S. passport for one that is a lot less threatening to
me and my PC.” Warren added: “This is the second former American
I have known who has done this for exactly these reasons!” I
remembered a hacker libertarian who had been hoping to construct
an island in the Caribbean, beyond the reach of technophobic
politicians.
Warren was disappointed enough with Washington to tell the Net:
“I’m beginning to feel like a German Jew in 1935.” He didn’t just
hate Clipper and the harassment of Zimmermann. On top of
everything else, Washington had recently passed a digital telephone
bill that “would make Lyndon Johnson, Nixon’s Watergate team, and
J. Edgar Hoover drool on their bibs.” The project would cost the
taxpayers billions of dollars over the years—all this to make the
phone system more tappable, out of fear that crooks might
otherwise forward phone calls to bugfree locations. Washington was
actually setting aside more money for snooping than for electronic

libraries. And now Warren feared that the Feds someday would ban
encryption outright.
Beyond D. C.’s computer-related stupidities, he loathed the way the
Feds played fast and easy with the Constitution on matters such as
drug law enforcement. Agencies, for example, could keep money
and equipment taken from suspects and use them for their own
purposes, thus giving police “a profit motive” to abuse Americans’
rights.
“No doubt,” Warren said, “many in Germany told that nation’s
Jews, ‘It’s not that serious’ and ‘It’s just a phase—it’ll pass’ as they
disarmed the citizens in the name of law and order only a few years
before filling the camps and ovens that somehow good, law-abiding
Germans just never knew about until after the war. If we don’t
watch out, our government’s cure for ‘crime’ will become even more
dangerous than the illness. And this time, I don’t think Sweden will
be a safe haven.”
Clearly Warren was a long, long way from the optimism of Orwell’s
Revenge, the book in which Big Brother lost to the hackers.
I doubted that the United States was quite as Oceania-like as Jim
Warren obviously believed, and his own German parallel might be
stretching it. Stamp Act parallels did, however, fit. An old, ignorant,
Torylike order wanted to pass laws to contain the new, and I could
envision an increasing number of ugly confrontations between
bureaucrats and Netfolk. Baker, the ex-NSA man, hadn’t hesitated in
the least to come up with his wacky characterizations of Clipper foes.
To the D. C. policy elite, we on the Net were fair pickings.
All the hype about the Information Superhighway notwithstanding,
most of the Feds didn’t feel quite as at home on computer networks
as billed. Most Congress members in mid-1995 still lacked public e-
mail addresses.
Meanwhile, the Net was catching on among millions of younger
Americans who surfed freely, while their elders could barely master
commercial networks such as CompuServe. By way of Clipper and
blatantly anti-network copyright proposals, the White House was
kissing off all too many within Generation Net.[6.24]

A further embarrassment was the contrasting enlightenment of
some Republican conservatives, who many Democrats on the Net
might have dismissed entirely in the past. Rush Limbaugh, the right -
wing talk show host, didn’t just show up on CompuServe as a visitor.
He personally logged on again and again and even met his wife
there. He might not be on the Net itself, but he was much more at
ease with the technology than were the majority of the liberals on
the Hill. Meanwhile, the most powerful conservative of all, House
Speaker Newt Gingrich, spoke out against the Exon amendment.
William Buckley, the noted conservative journalist, was a major
backer of my proposal for a decentralized national library system
online. And the conservative writer George Gilder, while all too
zealous at times about free markets, had made some of the most
prescient predictions on the direction in which the technology was
headed.
Too many Democrats were TV-centric, while Gilder believed that
computers would be the new entertainment medium, prevailing over
television. Sales figures proved him right. More Americans bought
desktops computers in 1994 than purchased color televisions, and it
was only a matter of time until they logged onto computer networks
and worried about their privacy there. And here were Clinton and
Gore pushing Clipper with more ardor than they could summon up
for well-stocked electronic libraries for all.
Of course, not everybody on the Democratic side was hopeless,
and many Republican law-and-order types loved Clipper, the Bush
leftover. Also, these same politicians might well applaud the Clinton
Administration’s anti-Net copyright proposals, not understanding all
the undertows that could ultimately drag property rights under. But
at least they hadn’t enlisted civil libertarians and populists in their
campaigns to the extent that Bill Clinton had. I’d never have voted
for the man if I’d known in advance about Clipper, the harassment of
Zimmermann, and the antediluvian copyright policies. Bush in some
ways might have been preferable. Not knowing the difference
between a potato chip and a silicon chip, he would have done much
less damage. A smarter, more principled Democrat than Clinton
could pick up the pieces in ’96.

Clinton’s Justice Department showed a brazen and bizarre lack of
fairness toward Zimmermann. Until the statute of limitations expired
—and that was fuzzy, even to lawyers—the Feds might just let him
dangle. Without finding Zimmermann guilty of anything, or even
charging him, Washington in a sense was already leveling penalties.
He had to spend hours and hours away from his regular consulting
business to work on his case.
Total costs might reach $300,000 if the prosecutors decided to act.
Even if lawyers donated their time—and Zimmermann might enjoy
the services of some noted attorneys outraged by the threat to civil
liberties—there would be the burden of telephone costs, travel, and
hotels. Appeals for donations went up in such areas of the Usenet as
talk. crypto. politics, comp. org. eff. talk, and, of course, alt. security. pgp.
People could pay by credit card, encoding their numbers via PGP.[6.25]
In the end, no matter what happened to Zimmermann, the real
victory might be in the marketplace. And there Clipper was losing.
AT&T and a chip maker named VLSI Technology came out with a
chip that would challenge even the NSA’s supercomputer. Given a
choice between that and Clipper, who’d want the latter? Even before
then, in fact, few customers were going for Clipper-based
equipment.[6.26] In the end it looked as if Washington would resort
not to a chip but to continued pressure on U. S. corporations to make
available the key schemes of more secure plans. And even then, I
hoped, the industry would balk. The more such foolishness became
a habit here, the less protected would be American companies
abroad, as people outside the States followed Washington’s
example.
Some of the biggest Clipper haters, meanwhile, were overlooking
their differences to unite against the tumor chip. Jim Bidzos’
company had already granted a license for the basic technology to
ViaCrypt, which, at least in the latter’s opinion, left it free to sell a
commercial version of PGP. And this past action may have been a
door opener in a way for Phil Zimmermann. PGP was no longer so
much of an outlaw program in the eyes of many, and businesses felt
they could use it and get technical support. Beyond that, professors
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, whence much of the

RSA technology had come, were sick of all the patent wars. They
just wanted to see solid encryption in use. And Bidzos, however
much he quarreled with Zimmermann, was himself determined that
the Feds not control encryption. The compromise could go a long
way toward enshrining RSA as at least an informal world standard,
and thwarting RSA’s biggest competitor, the NSA.
And so Bizdos and colleagues let PGP be used for noncommercial
purposes as long as the newer versions were incompatible with the
older ones that lacked the blessing of RSA and Public Key Partners.
Of course that still didn’t solve the hassles of securing international
commerce with a truly strong encryption standard with which the
U. S. government felt comfortable. But even if PGP-style products
weren’t official, they were murdering Clipperish schemes before
snoop-ready chips and programs could take root. The world’s
governments might well have to join countries like France and try to
ban strong encryption.
But could they? Too many people in too many countries were
already using software such as PGP. Hackers proudly included their
public PGP keys—those weird combinations of letters and numbers—
at the ends of their messages or told how people could obtain them.
PGP keys were becoming status symbols. PGP wasn’t yet built into
popular e-mail programs such as Eudora for easy use, so, if nothing
else, the keys indicated a certain level of technical expertise. They
were the new vanity plates of the dataways. PGP was even
becoming a small industry; for example, you could shell out $20 and
officially register your key with a company in Palo Alto, California,
called SLED. And then people receiving messages from you would
know they were really from you.
SLED required a mailed or faxed driver’s license or passport, or a
preprinted personal check. This wasn’t the best proof of identity, but
it would at least let Netfolks spot obvious forgeries immediately. If
nothing else, you could “register” your key with friends who were
well known and well trusted on the net.
With or without formal registration, more and more Netfolks felt
lost without their PGP. Father Bill Morton, the Anglican priest

mentioned earlier, the one who used PGP to accept confessions over
the Net, wrote a parody:
It’s one for the money,
Two for the show,
Three to get ready,
Now go, cat, go!
But don’t you step on my PGP.
You can do anything, but lay off my PGP.
Responding to a query I’d posted in several encryption-related
newsgroups, he explained in an e-mail why PGP meant so much to
him. Confessions were just part of the story:
In the history of Anglican pastoral care, there is a strong
tradition of the use of the letter as a means of spiritual
guidance. Actually this tradition goes deep into the roots of
the Catholic Church. Some of the books regarded as
“spiritual classics” are compilations of correspondence
between a person and their spiritual director. Until the
advent of PGP, e-mail was not a suitable place for such
correspondence. It’s one thing to have your
correspondence published 100 years after the fact; it’s quite
another to run the risk of having your personal thoughts
posted to a Usenet newsgroup or read by the sysop of a
BBS. Now they know that even if they hit the wrong button
and send their e-mail to the wrong place, it is secure....
Legislation that would make encryption illegal or require a
mandatory backdoor would totally compromise any trust in
e-mail or any other form of electronic text system such as
word processors.
Father Morton’s respect for privacy came through when I asked for
examples of confidences that people had shared with him by way of
PGP: “No matter how I disguise the facts,” he told me, “even if I
were to create a fictitious person, someone somewhere would

believe that they were reading the details of their life story.” And so
he was vague, other than to say, to give an idea of the gravity of
what he heard, “Thoughts, dreams, hopes, as well as lust, anger,
and hatred. Sometimes, actually oftentimes, there are things that
you wouldn’t even tell your spouse. Our lives are based on trust.”
Thanks to PGP, Father Morton could maintain that trust not only
with people locally in Woodstock, New Brunswick, but with Netfolk
from thousands of miles away.
Some people met him in newsgroups. “We’ll have an exchange of
e-mail on a specific topic,” he said, “and at one point it will become
evident that I am a priest.” He neither hid nor played up his
occupation. Upon learning it, he said, the Netter at the other end
“may wish to change the topic and enter into a brief correspondence
about a particular question. That conversation might last one or two
posts and is usually, though not always, in PGP.” In addition, he
corresponded with a very small group of people regularly about
significant events in their lives. These conversations were always in
PGP.
“Before PGP,” Father Morton said, “e-mail was guarded in its
content. A typical e-mail exchange might be to set up a phone
conversation or meeting or discuss issues in very general terms.
Now, at least in a few cases, the PGP mail is much more open in its
content, and as a result the e-mail pastoral relationship can be much
more productive.”
Father Morton was not alone in his use of PGP to protect personal
secrets. For example, the Samaritans, a group devoted to talking
people out of suicide, said it would accept PGP-encrypted messages.
“The Samaritans,” announced a Usenet post, “have always taken
the confidentiality of callers extremely seriously. Indeed the most
frequently asked question within the movement about our e-mail
service is, ‘What about confidentiality?’” Surely, in an era when more
and more communications happened to be electronic, it would be
folly to deny reliable encryption to the Samaritans and the people
they helped. Although the Samaritans felt more confidence about
the security of unprotected e-mail than did Father Morton, they
understood an important truth: perceptions mattered as much as

anything. If their correspondents lacked faith in the confidentiality of
e-mail, they couldn’t write as freely. And, as I saw it, they might not
be as open to rescue. If Washington banned PGP, if it replaced it
with an inferior, Clipperish arrangement, the Samaritans just might
not be as successful as with truly secure encryption.
Privacy wasn’t just for confessions and for suicide prevention. It
was also for teenagers. Donna—she supplied her real name but I’ll
protect her with a pseudonym—lived in Florida and was a seventeen-
year-old junior in high school who was already using PGP. She e-
mailed me:
I couldn’t speak for other teenagers and their parents,
but with my extremely intrusive mother, I use all the
privacy devices I can get. I’ve kept extensive journals since
second grade—she’s always read them and nosed around,
no matter where I’ve tried to hide them. She’s opened
letters from friends and pokes her nose into anything that
she considers unorthodox; we don’t quite see eye to eye on
many issues. I’m a good student, responsible, don’t drink or
do drugs, blah blah blah, but she has continuously invaded
my privacy over the years despite her lack of justification.
Two years ago I tried a locked drawer where I kept all of
my papers, letters, and the like, but she has opened the
drawer with my keys. So now I just do everything on the
computer and encrypt/password it. I can see how some
parents might justify searching their kids’ rooms—just as
police can under circumstances justify searching homes.
But, Donna went on, if a child were doing something illegal, there
“would be physical evidence.” That seemed clear: You could encrypt
a diary full of unorthodox musings; you could not encode a
marijuana stash.
I would have trusted Donna, but I still had mixed feelings about
most teenagers using PGP without their parents’ sharing the keys.
How long until Senator Exon ranted that the young would encrypt
dirty bytes? In the end, however, just as with children’s use of the

Net itself, PGP should be a family decision, not a federal one;
Washington mustn’t turn into a giant version of Donna’s mother.
Risks from a ban, even one limited to children, so outweighed the
benefits. If Donna’s mother wanted to understand her daughter,
then maybe she needed to spend less time doing a domestic-level
KGB act and more time at a computer—seeing for herself what her
daughter was up to. In the process she might understand Donna
well enough to tolerate her opinions. She’d better learn to brook
them; her daughter was almost eighteen, the age of adulthood in
the United States. Soon many parents would be more comfortable
with the technology, and then, family by family, parents could decide
whether to be Big Mama or Big Daddy and look for PGP-encrypted
files. It should be a family, not a government, matter.
If nothing else, parents themselves could use PGP to guard their
own privacy. “I use PGP at home solely for keeping confidential
information from prying eyes—for instance, from my son and my
son’s friends, as well as for keeping their information in one central
place,” said Joe Collins, an employee of an international investment
bank based in New York. It guarded his burglar alarm codes, the
codes to the family safe, all credit card numbers, and all passwords
to software on the family computer. Yes, some popular software
came with encryption, and certain people might have argued that
home users such as Collins didn’t need PGP. But the encryption
found in popular software was nowhere near in PGP’s league. In
fact, Crak Software, a company in Phoenix, Arizona, even sold
“password-recovery software” to crack popular programs such as
WordPerfect, Word, Excel, Lotus 1-2-3, and Quattro Pro (for backup
purposes).
AIDS activists especially understood the possibilities of good,
strong encryption; victims of the disease, after all, were treated
about as fairly as lepers had been in biblical times. In New York a
group called ACT UP tried to get the public health officials to
encourage labs to use PGP to protect the identities of patients. The
officials liked the idea. The program died at the hands of a
parsimonious governor; but sooner or later, I suspected, PGP would

be used in one way or another to protect the privacy of AIDS
patients, if it wasn’t already.
In the business area, the advantages of keeping PGP legal—and
avoiding Clipperish solutions—were just as clear as at the personal
level. “PGP is essential,” said Robert David Steele, a former CIA
agent whose passion for legalized encryption and dislike of Clipper
must have endeared him to many hackers.[6.27] “Security is the
foundation for openness. In order for a world of open electronic
exchanges actually to succeed, electronic persons have to know
three things, all of which PGP supports: (a) that the person on the
other end of the link is who he says he is, (b) that the information
being received is genuine and not altered, and (c) that a digital cash
payment will be forthcoming, assuming that this is part of the
transaction.” Steele was not just talking about the benefits of PGP
for business alone, but clearly it was among the major uses that he
quite properly had on his mind here.
Many business people on the Net agreed. I was hardly surprised
to read in the New York Times about the use of PGP “in what was
apparently the first retail transactions on the Internet using a readily
available version of powerful data encryption software designed to
guarantee privacy.” A Philadelphia man had used PGP to scramble his
credit card number and spent $12.48 and shipping costs on a
compact disk with rock music from a New Hampshire company
called Net Market. More benefits were to come. Already other
companies were working on digital cash, which could let bits and
bytes go out over the Net in ways that prevented them from being
easily traced. They would be, in other words, just like dollar bills.[6.28]
You could spend them without Big Brother knowing that you’d
bought a Playboy, a Rush Limbaugh book, a condom, or whatever
else might somehow cause your neighbors or your boss to take
offense.
PGP also made sense for privacy protection within companies. An
accounting firm in Palo Alto, California, for example, used PGP to
guard backup tapes in case of loss or theft, and a Washington
accountant relied on it for client communications.[6.29] And when
Zimmermann himself asked online for PGP testimonials, a man with

a telecommunications firm on the West Coast told him how much he
loved it as an alternative to Clipper:
Once it becomes a standard, the competitive software
industry will have no incentive to continue technical
development in crypto. And then once Clipper gets cracked
by outsiders or otherwise compromised, there will still be a
lot of bureaucratic inertia protecting it and keeping the fact
that it’s been compromised a secret.
We see a serious need for crypto to protect client records
regarding their telephone systems and computer networks,
to protect our internal company memos sent via e-mail, and
to protect strategic business information sent via e-mail.
We figure that a misrouted piece of client data is a
potentially serious liability issue, and a misrouted sales
proposal or similar business document is like leaving a
credit card on a park bench. Due diligence, fiscal
responsibility, and all that. The big plus is simply that we
will be able to confidently move a lot more of our business
online, which will make a huge difference to us. More
efficient handling of client requests, more efficient internal
discussions, and more effective communication with
investors. In particular I do a lot of strategic business
planning online, and it always bugs me in the back of my
mind—‘What happens if this gets lost on the Internet?’ In
one sense good crypto is like a good business dinner. It
facilitates the flow of ideas in a relaxed atmosphere.
At the same time, needless to say, PGP could improve the flow of
political ideas. In 1993 Boris Yeltsin had been at odds with foes
nostalgic for the old Soviet state. “If a dictatorship takes over
Russia,” a message from Latvia had told Zimmermann, “your PGP is
widespread from the Baltic to the Far East now and will help
democratic people if necessary. Thanks.”[6.30] In Burma rebels used
PGP against an oppressive regime. A writer in Thailand said that
before PGP reached them, captured papers had “resulted directly in

arrest, including whole families, and their torture and death.”
Activists in El Salvador and Guatemala also relied on the program.
“In this business, lots of people have been killed,” said Daniel
Salcedo, a member of the Human Rights Project of the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.[6.31] David Banisar of the
Electronic Privacy Information Center told me of PGP being used in
Kenya, Mali, Senegal, Egypt, and Mali, among other countries.
“Wire tapping is conducted in nearly every country in the world,”
Banisar wrote in a paper with the marvelous title of “Bug Off!” “It is
frequently abused.” A 1992 State Department report, for example,
told of governments and private organizations snooping away in
dozens of countries. And it hadn’t happened just in the Third World.
“There have been numerous cases in the United Kingdom which
revealed that the British intelligence services monitor social activists,
labor unions, and civil liberties groups,” Banisar said in a paper
written for Privacy International.[6.32] What’s more, the Canadian
Communications Security Establishment had shelled out more than
$1.1 million to scan through millions of messages and pick out
dangerous words and phrases.[6.33] Would the CCSE abuse the
system and routinely compile dossiers on law-respecting people?
And what about the FBI here in the States? Many Netfolks took it for
granted that Louis Freeh’s people were keeping up with Usenet.
“The FBI has the ability to police the Internet and, indeed, has
been doing so,” David Nadler and Kendrick Fong, two tech-oriented
lawyers, would write later on in Computer Digest: The Journal of
Professional Development for the Washington-Baltimore Technology
Community. “In fact, the FBI has been collecting Usenet postings
since the late 1980s.”
A formulaic condemnation of all FBI monitoring, however, would
be unfair. I could hardly object to the Feds reading the public
messages of egotistical nuts with a clear-cut predilection for
violence. What better reason not to censor Usenet and any audio
and video equivalents that might follow? Let the kooks rant away,
hour after hour, educating Louis Freeh about their plans. Usenet
wasn’t anyone’s living room. Posting messages there was like
publishing a book or speaking in a town square. Via the free

Stanford Netnews Filtering Service, I could receive electronic mail
messages whenever a specified word showed up in a major area of
Usenet. Yes, I could track people by name. I could also choose
words associated with a topic. That was the magic of the Net; it
gave us small-fry many of the same tools available to the intelligence
bureaucracies. The same kind of wizardry that might let Canadian
cops snoop on citizens could allow me to track the utterances of Al
Gore on the subject, say, of the Internet.
One technology, however, may have bureaucrats more
uncomfortable than any other—encryption. A U. S. database expert
named Patrick Ball found this out the hard way when he was in
Ethiopia to help the Office of the Special Prosecutor. Ball efficiently
helped build a database of crimes that had occurred under the
regime of Mengistu Haile Mariam. He was accomplishing plenty.
Then a bureaucratic rival started a turf war with him. The man
falsely claimed that Ball had been using PGP for secret
correspondence, probably with the CIA, even though the truth was a
little more mundane. Ball hadn’t used PGP for anything but test
messages; the people at the other end lacked the technical skills.
But the rival didn’t know. He confused PGP with uuencoding—a way
to prepare programs for accurate transmission via e-mail—and
unfortunately the chief special prosecutor believed Ball’s accuser and
forced the database expert to resign.
So often that was the case with police: They displayed a mix of
fear and ignorance. And they were not totally wrong to be worried.
One computer expert predicted that in the next few years criminals
would routinely use electronic scrambling. “This could signal the end
of computer forensics,” said William Spernow, “before it even gets
off the ground.” A criminal relied on a double set of books,
employing PGP to conceal the accurate one, and dope-peddlers in
Miami used encryption.[6.34]
Not only that, just as I was writing part of this chapter, the
newspapers told how terrorists in Japan had killed 10 people and
injured about 5,500 by spreading nerve gas in a Tokyo subway
station. Wouldn’t restrictions on encryption make such acts harder to
commit with impunity?

Strong counterarguments existed, however, against the
jackbooters who would ban strong encryption or impose the Clipper
variety on us. I would rather that nations not spy on each other. But
I fully recall the naiveté of the past, the fantasy that “gentlemen do
not open other gentlemen’s mail”; whether we liked it or not,
espionage and counterespionage would always go on. In that spirit,
instead of wasting money on Clipperish schemes, countries could
spend money developing more powerful computers to crack
encryption, and they could also refine the unscrambling techniques.
That would not be cheap. But since bad guys wouldn’t let Clipper or
successors be the apex of technology, the United States hadn’t any
other choice. Other countries might feel otherwise. Bureaucrats just
couldn’t contain technology. Clipperish schemes would be brainless
in any country.
As one alternative, governments could rely more heavily on open
sources—for example, newspapers and other media outlets,
especially those online. The more journalists out there, and the more
independent they were, the harder it would be for nations to keep
secrets and conspire against each other. The United States and
friends had the most selfish of reasons for encouraging the spread of
the free press.
The open source idea was hardly original to me. Others had talked
about it for years, most notably Robert Steele, the ex-CIA agent,
who observed that publicly available material was often far more
useful than the clandestinely gathered variety. I didn’t agree with
much of what Steele said—I wanted more isolation between
journalists and government than he might have liked. But his basic
point was sound. Information was most reliable when it was in the
open and could be dissected, rather than hiding it behind a “secret”
stamp. The spread of network technology could only strengthen this
premise.
Yet another approach could be the selective use of agents, in new-
style roles, taking advantage of high technology. Here again I had
mixed feelings. But in an era when countries such as Iraq were
trying to develop nuclear weapons, this option should be kept alive.

What about terrorists? As with child-molesting rings and drug
cartels, Clipper just would not do any good. Secret groups would be
the last in the world to use the chip. Far better for intelligence
agencies to work on more powerful computers and truly effective
software for cracking codes. Breakthroughs might not come
immediately, but would sooner or later, and the civilian sector might
ultimately benefit when the technology finally did reach the world at
large. Advanced supercomputers, for example, could be used for
weather forecasting, or for graphics and design—the same wizardry
that had helped make possible the Visible Human Project described
in the last chapter.
Meanwhile an open-source approach could often do the job. The
accused terrorists in Japan hadn’t exactly stayed hidden from the
world before the subway incidents. Shoko Asahara, their leader, had
delivered sermon after sermon with allusions to poisonous gas; in
the city of Matsumoto where he had been at odds with authorities
over some land, 7 people had died and 200 had suffered injuries
when a cloud of sarin wafted in the area. Small wonder that the
Japanese government had caught up with the sect so soon after the
Tokyo tragedy. Newspaper databases would have told plenty, beyond
any information that happened to be in the government’s own
records.
Legally authorized bugs might be yet another solution, and so, at
times, might be informers wired to make the best case. In an era of
near-invisible electronics, this approach would be increasingly
practical.
What’s more, if Bill Clinton and Al Gore really cared about
protecting citizens in a high-tech age, they would worry less about
snooping on citizens and more about hardening up points of
vulnerability. Steele noted how easily criminals could “maliciously
interfere with the computers that control the power system. It is
relatively easy to destroy computer capabilities—this takes much less
skill than to ‘crack’ them and divert computing resources.” Also,
terrorists could wreak havoc with computers that controlled
telephone systems in such areas as communications for government
and banking.

He also warned of interference with the computers of Wall Street
and the Federal Reserve. “Trillions in digital data” could vanish into
the ether. “A massive global economic panic” would ensue.
Preventative measures wouldn’t be cheap, but if the American
government did care about security, it would prepare realistically for
the threats of the information era rather than doing an inept Big
Brother act.
To rig up a whole nation for wire taps would be both a waste and
a disgrace. I pondered the ironies. Here the NSA and similar
agencies were supposed to protect normality—to guard families
against dopesters, sex perverts, terrorists, and the rest—and yet Phil
Zimmermann the husband and father might go to jail. “I think it’s
kind of unreal to him,” Zimmermann said when I asked how his son
felt about this. “I tell him that I have some talented lawyers working
for me, and that we’re doing the best we can.” And Zimmermann’s
wife? “She thinks that they can’t possibly indict me, because that
would be wrong—that somehow they’ll realize that and just back
out. Of course by the time your book is printed, we’ll know one way
or the other whether she was right.”
A Few Words about Library
Books,
Democracy, and Socks the
Cybercat
The White House in the 1990s was extolling computer nets as a
way to Bring Government Closer to the People. Americans could dial
up “An Interactive Citizens’ Handbook” on the Internet, see a photo
of a teenaged Clinton with JFK, and listen to Socks the Clinton cat
meow. But could Clinton-Gore hear us? Just how “interactive” was
the White House?

Clinton boosters formed a group called Americans Communicating
Electronically to improve electronic contacts between mortals and
bureaucrats. Al Gore, meanwhile, had flaunted his typing skills with
the famous visit to CompuServe. But was electronic democracy truly
alive on the Internet and other computer networks? Not quite. All
the techish sizzle notwithstanding, Clinton-Gore might instead be
giving us electronic oligarchy, especially if Republicans followed the
horrible precedents that the White House was setting. Consider the
dubious, somewhat Orwellian process that was shaping the National
Information Infrastructure—the famous data highways and related
endeavors.
So far Washington had not worked nearly as hard as it should to
drive down the cost of knowledge for the average American. At the
same time a network-hostile copyright proposal was delighting
information monopolists and imperiling the ability of citizens to share
electronic newspaper clips in even a limited way.
I testified at an official hearing on the NII in 1993, and what most
struck me about Clinton-Gore was the chasm between words and
deeds—the same mind-set that led to Oceania’s propaganda agency
being named the Ministry of Truth. The gospel according to Al Gore
was that people of all income levels would be able to travel the
dataways. His musings later adorned the peach-colored newsprint of
The Mini Page, a newspaper insert for children.
“No longer will geographical location, wealth, gender, or any other
factor limit learning, ” Gore reassured elementary schoolers. He told
how “a child from my home town of Carthage, Tennessee, will be
able to come home from school, turn on a computer, and plug into
the Library of Congress in Washington, D. C. ” The NII would clearly
be in the grand democratic tradition, small “d. ”
The next day, however, the Washington Post carried news of a
different stripe from Bruce Lehman, the Clinton-Gore commissioner
of patents and trademarks, who chaired the NII working group on
intellectual property. I learned that “because of the ease of digital
reproduction, Lehman does not foresee that digital libraries will put
copyrighted works within easy reach online the way they do books
on a library shelf. Copyrighted digital materials are likely to be

available only to subscribers—libraries, for example—who pay royalty
fees, he said. People who want the material might have to go to
their local library and use a computer there that would not allow
them to copy or redistribute the work, Lehman said.”[6.35] A few
months later Bruce Lehman would graciously tell the Wall Street
Journal that, yes, he would tolerate children carrying home
copyrighted CD-ROMs and floppies of electronic books.[6.36]
Compared to networked books, however, the CDs and the rest
would be pathetic. Distribution over the Internet and other networks
could be the cheapest way to get the material spread around, while
assuring a wide variety of material for all. When William Buckley
likened CD-ROMs to 78-rpm shellac records in the era of the
Internet, he couldn’t have been more precise. And yet this was the
future as envisioned by Bill Clinton’s intellectual property czar. So
much for the well-informed citizenry needed for a Jeffersonian
America. Lehman was beating the bushes for electronic oligarchy.
Once I had felt that the Clinton-Gore people might truly share my
own egalitarian dreams. I’d thought that nonlobbyists like me stood
a healthy chance. I had been writing about computers for close to a
decade; earlier I had covered a poverty beat, and I knew how we
could drive down the cost of small computers so that someday even
Head Start kids could read electronic books on them. What better
way to encourage democracy? The whole country, not just the elite,
could grow up understanding abstract thought. Could the
Constitution have been drafted by a mob of illiterate TV watchers?
Rather than letting Big Brother choose books for us, we could
establish a democratic system with many librarians in many cities
empowered to make acquisitions. Never would bureaucrats be able
to do the equivalent of tweaking old copies of the London Times
behind our backs. It would be too damn hard with so many librarians
in so many locations, and with the same material reposing on
millions and millions of tablet-style computers that individual
Americans owned. My vision was one of electronic federalism, not of
Big Brother policing our reading tastes. TeleRead wouldn’t
undermine local schools and public libraries. Quite the contrary.
TeleRead would buy affordable, sharp-screened machines for them,

sending a signal to Silicon Valley and paving the way for similar
computers to go on sale at the Kmart for $ 99. 95 for anyone to buy.
Just as important, unlike the Postal plan mentioned earlier in this
chapter, my TeleRead plan would let schools and libraries use the
hardware without Big Brotherish restrictions. They could store
whatever they wanted on their own computers for local people to
dial up. And to make the national library more useful at the local
level, they could add special, Web-style links designed for the people
they served—not just for whole communities, but perhaps even for
individual readers.
What’s more, TeleRead would respect diversity and freedom of
expression in other ways. Publishers could gamble fees up front to
bypass librarians and qualify for royalties, and if censored from the
national library, they could post on the Net itself. I took it for granted
that Washington would try to censor TeleRead. That was the reason
I envisioned a whole network of many librarians, in many places,
together with long-range funding. Besides, my plan reflected the old
wisdom from hackers: When censorship arises, just route around it.
Private companies could make some nice money off officially banned
books. Imagine the promotional opportunities; “Nixed by
Washington” could be the new “Banned in Boston. ” What’s more,
since TeleRead was public and involved many librarians, not just a
tiny D. C. elite, any censorship would probably be much more
conspicuous than in the world of corporate publishing.
In other ways, too, TeleRead would be anti-Big Brother. Americans
would not have to make private companies privy to their reading
habits. The national library could track dialups for the purpose of
paying writers and publishers—you couldn’t retrieve books without
reporting past accesses. But TeleRead would include protections.
Records associated with individual users could be temporary, just a
way to prevent information providers from abusing the system with
repeated dialups. People could buy controversial books by way of
anonymous digital money. In fact, with sophisticated enough fraud
controls, the same techniques might eventually be used to prevent
names from being associated with dialup records even for a short
time. If nothing else, people could entrust TeleRead records to

certified private companies that reported accesses without revealing
identities.
TeleRead, then, could provide even more safeguards than public
library records in the paper era—significant, since librarians by habit
had respected privacy much more than had other government
officials. “There was a case back in Nixon’s era, ” Phil Zimmermann
would eventually remind me, “where Nixon tried to find out what
some of his enemies were reading at the library, and the librarians
were, of course, up in arms about being asked to supply a list of
books that had been checked out by a particular person or a list of
people that had checked out a particular book. They were able to
resist the efforts by the government to obtain that information. I
think that we need to have the same kind of controls in place for
future libraries that are on the Net. ” I couldn’t have agreed more.
Even the hardware could serve to thwart Big Brother by promoting
free expression and democracy. TeleRead would let people talk back
to bureaucrats and among themselves; the machines would work
with keyboards, and someday they might even serve in part as
wireless digital telephones, not just computers. TeleRead would let
Americans all be more uppity. The information in the national library
would enrich public debate; it would at least somewhat blur
distinctions between the wealthy and those who otherwise couldn’t
afford top-quality information.
This needn’t be just a dream. The United States had a $ 6-trillion -
plus economy, and if just some of us used electronic forms for
government and commercial transactions, we eventually would save
tens of billions in time and money. As noted earlier in this book, the
same pen interfaces that were ideal for reading would be great for
forms. E-forms could help flag errors in tax returns and other
documents, “interview” users quickly, and just as quickly narrow
down questions to the essentials. And so the saving in time and
money could easily justify a well-stocked national library. No magic
was involved here, just an old principle of information management.
Two applications ( smart forms and the electronic books ) made more
sense than just one ( the books ). In fact, the American Society for
Information Science would later approach me to do a chapter on

electronic libraries for an ASIS book from MIT Press, and I would
oblige. Clearly TeleRead was a logical link between Gore’s plans for
reinventing government and his oft-claimed desire to drive down the
cost of knowledge.
I was a writer, not an attorney or information scientist, but a
number of well-credentialed people understood the logic of
TeleRead, even when I showed them a version somewhat less
refined than the one just described. At the urging of a distinguished
Washington lawyer, I applied to testify at the interagency hearings
on intellectual property law in the digital age. But he warned me
some bizarreness was afoot. Experts from the Library of Congress
would not run the hearings; nowadays electronic books would be
more within the domain of the Commerce Department. A Commerce
bureaucrat instead would be the main player here—Bruce Lehman.
That should have been my tip-off that the proceedings would be big
and furry and jump, and come with a pocket for joeys; but I went
ahead just the same. The lawyer organizing the hearing seemed
friendly, alert, intelligent, receptive. She said each witness would
testify just a few minutes, and that after the hearings the Feds
would carefully examine our words.
My optimism grew. I expected at least a modicum of electronic
democracy, Gore-style, just as promised. So in November 1993 I
joined some thirty other witnesses in Crystal City, Virginia, across the
Potomac from Washington. Bill Clinton wanted his presidential
cabinet to look like America, and, in fact, a black man was secretary
of the Commerce. Gazing around the room, however, I saw a sea of
white lawyers in dark suits, along with a scattering of women in
power clothes. I could have been in California at an elite convocation
of the software and entertainment industries.
I ran into one of the members of the intellectual property group, a
minor White House advisor named David Lytel, who had promised to
read my proposal as sent to him on the Internet. Mr. White House
didn’t waste a nanosecond. “This is like Hollywood, ” Lytel said. “Not
everyone can be a star. We can’t use everyone’s idea. ”
“I’m not here to star, ” I said, “just to testify. Have you read my
proposal? ”

He said he had seen the prepared testimony I had left at the
entrance to the auditorium.
“But what about the thousands of words I sent you on the Net? I
thought you’d have a look and—”
“Excuse me,” he said and moved on.
His Hollywood analogy would strike me later as all too apt, for this
was shaping up as a TV-centric NII that favored television and
movies over books. Al Gore later would not hold his grand
information summit at the Library of Congress; no, he would jet off
to Hollywood and to a speech punctuated by jokes with a
comedienne.
There in the Crystal City auditorium, I saw a tall, gray-haired man
surrounded by a cluster of other people. Heads bobbed. Stephen
Metalitz was a lawyer and a power in the Information Industries
Association, the IIA. “Welcome, Steve,” Lehman greeted his first
witness in a voice that told me who the true star of the day was.
The rest of the hearing unfolded as I now feared. Witnesses from
trade associations pounded away at the same theme again and
again. Copyright law needed to be friendly to megaconglomerates or
they would never bless the dataways with their Terminator films. It
was as if the Internet, already starting to bristle with small
businesses, never existed.
I heard some cogent testimony from some fine people
representing librarians and educators, but all in all, I might as well
have been at an IIA convention. Lehman’s panel of bureaucrats,
some of them strangers to copyright law, just about dozed off during
my testimony. Chatting with me informally, certain industry
witnesses were more curious about my ideas than were the Feds. It
wasn’t just to size up the opposition. For my plan would divert
resources from bureaucracy to knowledge, and could actually help
many members of the information industry.
A potential obstacle rose ahead, though: the hostility of real, live
bureaucrats.
During a break I approached a working-group member from one
of the most bureaucratic agencies of them all, the General Services
Administration. “What do you think of my ideas for electronic

forms?” I asked. “I remember when you guys let a senator benefit
illegally from a federal lease on an office building. Imagine what you
could have done with better technology to help flag stuff like that.”
“Oh,” he said coldly, “we can just train our contracting officers
better.” Better to protect jobs for bureaucrats like him than to offer
affordable e-books for schoolchildren.
My foremost opponent, however, as I learned eventually, just may
have been Lehman himself—the chairman of the Intellectual
Property Working Group, which would help set copyright policy for
America’s dataways.
Bruce Lehman was Mr. Politically Correct. As his heroes he claimed
the career-enhancing names of Bill Clinton and Martin Luther King;
never mind the damage that his child-hostile copyright policies might
do to ghetto schools, or the fact that the copyright hearing had been
about as well integrated as a Klan meeting. The New York Times
would see in Lehman’s office “a handsomely framed photograph
taken at last year’s White House Christmas party. Bill and Hillary
Clinton stand in the middle. Mr. Lehman is to the left, under a
portrait of George Washington.”
His clothes were as aggressively fashionable as his choice of
heroes. The Times’s Teresa Riordan would write of “stylish suits
detailed with a fresh white handkerchief.” He might display “a touch
of exotic color, perhaps a mint-colored watchband or the ruby
background of a Brooks Brother tie.”[6.37] Lehman needn’t haunt any
thrift shops. During a twelve- to fourteen-month period before
joining the Administration, he had pulled down $430,000 as a
lobbyist and lawyer for intellectual property clients.[6.38]
The patent office’s Web site said he had represented “individuals,
companies, and trade associations in the area of intellectual property
rights as it affects the motion picture, telecommunications,
pharmaceutical, computer software, and broadcasting
industries.”[6.39] His clients had included Lotus and Microsoft.[6.40] The
latter was buying up electronic rights as if they were soft drinks for
the programmers’ offices. No, Microsoft would hardly be the world’s
leading backer of a universally affordable, well-stocked national
digital library of the TeleRead variety. I’d lobby anyone, any

company, for my idea. But could I ever persuade Microsoft? Oh,
come on. This was the company that owned the word “Windows.”
Clinton-Gore campaigners had once talked of “People First.” Based
on Lehman’s background and proclivities, however, a better motto in
the case of intellectual property might now be “Entertainment,
Information, and Software Magnates First.” It was as if Clinton-Gore
had turned national health policy over to a zealous insurance
lobbyist who had spent years crusading for higher premiums.
Even at the local level, Lehman was no stranger to the world of
money and politics. In 1991, while a Georgetown lawyer, he had lent
$10,000 at 12 percent interest to Washington city council candidate
Jim Zais even though local law apparently restricted candidates to
borrowing only from the usual lending institutions. Zais at the time
had raised less than $13,000 from other sources. Questioned by
election officials, the candidate had claimed ignorance of the law and
promptly paid the money back to Lehman, along with some $120 in
interest.[6.41]
Like many of his ex-colleagues at Swidler&Berlin, Lehman had
kept his checkbook wide open when national politicians needed
money. Many months later I learned that between January 1, 1991,
and November 28, 1994, the S&B crowd had made at least
$191,000 in political donations, including more than $22,000 from
Lehman himself during his days there. At least $146,000 of the
$191,000 had gone to the firm’s political-action committee. Lehman’s
personal contributions had reached at least eighteen congressional
candidates. In fairness, let me emphasize that Lehman didn’t just
have direct career considerations in mind—he was the first openly
gay man whom the U. S. Senate had confirmed as a top federal
official,[6.42] and he had given generously to gay political-action
committees.
Gay groups, in turn, showed their loyalty. They had wanted Clinton
to appoint Bruce Lehman to something, and the White House had
made him patent commissioner even though Lehman knew more
about copyrights. Ron Brown, however, secretary of Commerce,
said: “Bruce Lehman is not here because he’s gay. He’s the
absolutely best person for the job.”[6.43]

I believed Brown. If the Clinton Administration wanted library
interests to be kept at bay to placate rich campaign donors, Gore’s
dreamy rhetoric notwithstanding, no one would beat Lehman the ex -
lobbyist.
A few weeks after the intellectual property hearing in Crystal City,
a letter arrived from Mr. Reinventing Government himself. I had
mailed my TeleRead proposal and a related Washington Post clip to
Al Gore many months ago in spring 1993, and now he replied: “I am
impressed with this detailed and very professional presentation. The
information you provided certainly appears to contain ideas that
merit careful attention. I will retain this material for future
consideration as the President and I work on related policies and
programs. ” I hardly expected a meeting with Clinton and Gore. But
was it just possible that one of their GS-14s might deem me worth
five minutes of time, and follow up with a few questions?
Months passed. An occasional reporter or academic would read
my testimony and call or e-mail, but no one phoned from
Commerce. Meanwhile, seeing my TeleRead proposal on the Net,
major vendors contacted me. Often they asked the big question:
“How are you doing in Washington? ”
“Well, ” I said in effect, “I hope they’re keeping an open mind. ”
“That’s nice, bye, ” the answers would more or less come back—
assuming I heard again from people at all. The NII wasn’t just TV -
centric. It was Gore-centric. If you lacked his blessing, and his bland
letter to me didn’t count, you were dead or at least comatose unless
the right word from the White House revived your idea.
Then a “Green Paper” revealing the Clinton Administration’s
preliminary views on data highways and copyright came out. It was
even more horrid than I could have imagined, an insult to the
memory of Andrew Carnegie. The ethos was exactly the opposite of
TeleRead’s. For example, if the paper became law, one could not
transmit a newspaper article to a few friends; the present
ambiguities here would be resolved in favor of the copyright holders.
Yes, Washington should not allow anyone to bootleg newspaper
stories or magazine items for hundreds of people in an electronic
discussion group. In fact, I’d once reported a gross offender to a

magazine; I believed passionately in property rights. Clearly
electronic books, of all media, should enjoy protection, which, in
fact, TeleRead would promote by making piracy less lucrative. But
we also had to understand the purpose of copyright law—to help
spread information in a democracy and further the progress of
science and the arts. Lehman either was disingenuous or had let his
old $ 430, 000 make him a little amnesic toward Constitutional
tradition.
Ironically, if Lehman’s side won out, writers and journalists would
be among the biggest victims of the very law designed to protect us.
After all, we were not just producers of information; we were also
consumers. To write a book I would absorb millions of words from
the Internet, swapping information with friend after friend along the
way, including, yes, some electronic newspaper clips. But the Green
Paper bizarrely flouted the natural tendency of most people to share.
Imagine the effect on teachers and children. Quite rightly, Jim
Warren observed that Washington was cheating the public “to avoid
controversy among ‘important’ people. ”
“The Draft Report comes down firmly on the side of increased
rights for copyright owners in all relevant contexts, endorsing the
goal of enhanced copyright protection without acknowledging any
countervailing concerns, ” wrote Jessica Litman, a law professor at
Detroit’s Wayne State University. In a reply to the Administration she
said of the report: “It appears to be an advocacy document: It at
times misrepresents the state of current law, and gives voice to only
one side of complicated policy debates. ”
Another expert, law professor Pamela Samuelson at the University
of Pittsburgh, lambasted the Green Paper in an article for
Communications of the ACM, published by the Association for
Computing Machinery. She said that “not since the King of England
in the sixteenth century gave a group of printers exclusive rights to
print books in exchange for the printers’ agreement not to print
heretical or seditious material has a government copyright policy
been so skewed in favor of publisher interests and so detrimental to
the public interest. ” Contrary to Washington’s claim, the Green Paper

was not just a tweaking of existing law but a radical revision in favor
of publishers.[6.44]
Directly Orwellian questions arose. What about enforcement? How
to thwart the ease of mailing copies over the Net? The Green Paper’s
designers thought that laws against circumventing copy protection
would provide one of the main answers. But in the case of electronic
text, such visions were far too sanguine. People would want the
capability to print out material, and if they could print it out, they
could scan it and put it online again without the protection feature;
what’s more, hackers would inevitably develop software to
accomplish the same thing electronically.
Yes, the Green Paper would let publishers and others sue makers
of devices that could get around copy protection. But just what gear
was covered? Scanners? Fax machines? And what kinds of software?
What about legitimate programs that also had illicit uses? Were we
the new Soviets, living in fear of the digital equivalent of copiers and
other subversive gadgets? As William Buckley would write, “fax
machines and e-mail outwitted and frustrated even the
comprehensive revolutionary orders of Stalin and Mao. This side of
what used to be the Iron Curtain, we should have the resources to
handle our native bureaucracy.” The Green Paper was nothing more
than Big Bureaucracy trying to serve Big Business.
The Green Paper had much in common with Clipper. In both cases
bureaucrats were reducing respect for Washington by trying to
control the uncontrollable. I was hardly a kneejerker crying out for a
pigmy-sized government. My liberalism remained. I favored prenatal
nutrition programs, Head Start, public broadcasting, and a host of
other wonderful anachronisms from the heyday of the Democrats.
And yet here was the Clinton Administration blundering along in the
most obnoxious way and turning so many of my fellow liberals on
the Internet into libertarians.
If nothing else, the White House was complicating my job of trying
to sell the Net on TeleRead. It was not just a question of preempting
my idea in favor of an inferior solution rigged up for Clinton’s
powerful friends in entertainment and publishing. Like Clipper, the
Green Paper was lessening faith in Washington, period—no small

concern for somebody advocating a national program such as
TeleRead, even one developed with local sensibilities in mind.
Sometimes I wondered if Lehman might be a Manchurian Patent
[ 6. 45 ] Commissioner. Had the Libertarians brainwashed him to sully
Washington’s good name?
Again and again I flamed Lehman’s Green Paper on alt. activism
and at least half a dozen other newsgroups on the Internet. I hadn’t
any choice. He hated the bytes-want-to-be-free philosophy of
TeleRead. Clearly, if Lehman had read TeleRead, it would have driven
him nuts, given his apparent belief that copyrighted books must cost
readers. TeleRead, on the other hand, would mean fair treatment of
copyright holders and library users alike. With a TeleRead-style
library, publishers, writers, and private nets could still charge for
many categories of information and earn handsome sums from
online conferences and other services and products, including
customized software to guide people through electronic libraries.
Also, they would receive fair royalties for covered material such as
books. At the same time, however, thanks to the cost justification
provided by the e-forms, we could make electronic books free in this
TV-fixated era and thus encourage literacy.
Surely TeleRead could be a logical link between Gore’s plans for
reinventing government and his oft-claimed desire to drive down the
cost of knowledge. With TeleRead, the old scarcities could be
obsolete; rich and poor could dial up the same books. It would be a
far cry from the present when Beverly Hills spent many times more
on library materials than did some poorer jurisdictions. TeleRead was
not a cure-all; but in an era of tight budgets, the national library
could be phased in carefully, year by year, topic by topic, with
minimal pain. The reduction of expensive, onerous paperwork would
be like a tax rebate. For once, a program could simultaneously help
schoolchildren and small business people.
Perhaps the NII Advisory Council would see merit in TeleRead. The
White House didn’t necessarily have to follow its recommendations,
but wasn’t this the age of electronic democracy and citizens’ input? A
few problems had arisen, however. Bill Clinton’s people had tolerated
just one librarian among the more than thirty members of the

Council. An overworked teacher was there representing education.
But no full-time professional writers of books, and just one
newspaper publisher, had ended up tainting the Advisory Council.
Nor did any name show up from a distinguished publishing firm
such as Knopf or Farrar, Straus and Giroux. Instead the White House
blessed the NII with Vance Opperman, a friend of Al Gore’s and a
money man for the Democratic Party,[6.46] who was president of West
Publishing. By one estimate West grossed some $600 million a year
with pretax margins of almost 30 percent, or twice those of rivals.
[6.47] West-style firms were famous for Cadillac-priced data.
Opperman’s company had set up collections of court opinions and
slapped a proprietary system of citations on them. The meter
typically ran at $4 a minute or more, adding up to millions from Feds
and taxpayers alike.
Haunted by a group called the Taxpayer Assets Project, the Justice
Department had proposed an electronic database with public-domain
citations to help users locate material. But West had lobbied away
the plans. Nothing must deprive Al Gore’s friend, and so many other
politicians’ friend, of a chance to turn a buck. Opperman seemed
about as eager to drive down the cost of knowledge as Bull Connor
was to further civil rights in the days of cattle prods and police dogs.

At the same time the Advisory Council teemed with people from
such library-like outfits as CBS, Black Entertainment Television, and
Walt Disney. Bill Clinton’s people also let the movie industry’s
premier lobbyist sit on the council—Jack Valenti, a former aide to
Lyndon Johnson; yes, the same Valenti who had made history years
ago by sleeping better at night because, he said, LBJ was in the
White House. To the Council, too, went powerful telephone
executives, a man from Microsoft, and John Scully, the former Apple
executive who had been a Clinton stalwart in ’92. A co-chair was a
Clinton supporter named Ed McCracken. He came from Silicon
Graphics, a billion-dollar company that was hoping to make a fortune
off the new video technology.
Clearly entertainment was what counted most here. The term
National Information Infrastructure just didn’t suffice. A more
accurate description, given the paucity of librarians, educators, and
journalists on the council, would have been the National
Entertainment Infrastructure. Yes, people like Vance Opperman were
interested in electronic text, but, above all, from a business
perspective. Let the masses watch TV. His company would make a
fortune selling pricey information to the elite.
Mass literacy just wasn’t the main show here, not with all the
dutiful suits watching out for the earnings of CBS or Disney or
Microsoft or West, and without enough librarians and others to
balance them out.
A host of other issues remained. How fascinating that so many of
the most influential people in the Clinton galaxy were from outfits
such as telephone companies that wanted to profit off both
transmission and content. Despite all the rhetoric, I wondered how
attentive the Clintonians would be to, say, little companies that were
more interested in producing books or folk albums than in financing
Terminators or laying fiber optic cables.
Could money and politics have mattered just a little in the
selection of people for the NII Advisory Council? If nothing else, a
few questions arose in the case of West Publishing, the giant
publisher of legal information. Vance Opperman was friends with
Mack McLarty, Clinton’s first chief of staff.[6.48] What’s more,

Opperman cochaired the finance committee during the 1994
reelection campaign of Dianne Feinstein, a Democratic U. S. senator
from California who sat on a copyright subcommittee within the
Judiciary Committee.[6.49] A study by the Taxpayer Assets Project,
one of Ralph Nader’s groups, revealed how civic-minded West was.
By way of a political-action committee and gifts from lawyers,
lobbyists, and family members, the West crowd in five years had
given more than $738,000 to Congress members and the Democratic
National Committee.
Judges, too, must have loved the company. A West-run foundation
had dispensed $15,000 awards to federal judges for “distinguished
service to justice.” Over a dozen years, the selection committee had
included seven past or present members of the U. S. Supreme Court,
the ultimate interpreter of copyright law. West had paid for trips to
places as far off as Hawaii and the Virgin Islands. Benefiting,
according to the Minneapolis Star Tribune, were Justices Anthony
Kennedy, Sandra Day O’Connor, John Paul Stevens, Antonin Scalia,
and now-retired Justices Lewis Powell, Byron White, and William
Brennan.[6.50]
West impressed me. Via campaign gifts, friends, and favors such
as the trips, Opperman’s crew had cozied up to all three branches of
government—the executive, the legislative, and the judiciary.
Eager to see how representative West was with its people’s
political gifts, I phoned the Center for Responsive Politics, the
Washington-based group from which I simultaneously got
information about Lehman. Would the Center please send me a
printout of congressional and presidential donations from some other
members of the NII Advisory Council and from people and political-
action committees associated with their companies?
A list arrived for the period between January 1, 1991, and
November 28, 1994, and I scanned down the names on the laser-
printed sheets. The Walt Disney people hadn’t disappointed me.
Advisory Council member John F. Cooke, president of the Disney
Channel, had given at least $48,000 to politicians from coast to
coast and to Democratic organizations. Non-Council member Jeffrey

Katzenberg, then with the Disney conglomerate, had donated at
least $63,000 in one way or another.
I saw at least $400,000 in Disney-related gifts—donations from
top executives were just the start. Cook and Katzenberg on their
own couldn’t sway the White House and Congress, nor even could all
of Disney; but imagine what Hollywood and other rich industries
could do en masse to influence copyright and telecommunications
policies. What counted most wasn’t the person but the industry. At
one recent gathering at Steven Spielberg’s mansion—in spring 1995,
a time not covered by the laser-printed sheet—Bill Clinton had raised
$50,000 per couple.
Whatever the case, the stray change added up. Over at MCA,
Advisory Council member Alvin Teller gave at least $28,250 between
early 1991 and late 1994, while Lew Wasserman, a nonmember,
gave at least $87,000. Advisory Council member Jack Valenti,
Hollywood’s big lobbyist in D. C., donated at least $56,250.
Advisory Council member Stanley Hubbard, chairman and chief
executive of Hubbard Broadcasting in Minnesota, also made a good
showing. He and relatives gave at least $74,000 to people on the
Hill, political-action committees, and the Democratic Party.
Confronted with $1,000-per-election limits on political gifts to
members of Congress, Hubbard just spread his money around, as if
using greenbacks like calling cards. His donations reached powers
such as Representative Ed Markey of Massachusetts, who, until the
Republican victory in 1994, chaired the House Subcommittee on
Telecommunications and Finance. Many saw Markey as one of the
more progressive NII players. Just think, however, what such
politicians could have done without the distractions of special-
interest money—donations not only to them but also to colleagues
who would be more susceptible to pressure.
Telephone executives made the NII sugar-daddies list, of course.
Advisory Council member Bert Roberts Jr., MCI’s chairman and CEO,
gave at least $28,000 to an MCI political-action committee and to
politicians, ranging from Senator Bob Packwood to, yes, Edward
Markey. A supporting cast came from the ranks of the MCI
employees, including one of my techie heroes, Vint Cerf, “Mr.

Internet,” who contributed at least $1,000 to the same PAC as
Roberts.
Advisory Council member James Houghton of Corning Glass
donated more than $50,000 to members of Congress across the
country, and to party, presidential, and PAC funds. Corning, of
course, was rooting for fiberglass cable—a rival in some ways to
wireless technology, which some on the Internet considered the
future.
No, the millionaires on the Advisory Council had not committed
crimes or bribed anyone. Under the law, they had a right to give
massive amounts to campaigns as long as each gift did not exceed
the legal limits. To my knowledge no money had come from
anyone’s corporate tills, just from individuals and the political-action
committees to which they had lawfully contributed. Besides, just like
Lehman, many other rich donors must have had the most heartfelt
of reasons for personal donations, going far beyond copyright and
telecommunications issues. Even though copyright holders had
donated to many well-positioned politicians such as Senator Dianne
Feinstein, who was active on intellectual property matters, that was
hardly the only reason why Hollywood millionaires gave. The woman
was a California Democrat. Many people at companies such as MCA
were the same. If a Californian, I myself might have voted for her.
Likewise, the people of West Publishing must have had varied
motives in contributing.[6.51] Vance Opperman was a former antiwar
protester and probably still saw himself as a force for social good. I
suspected, too, that he loved seeing his old friend Al Gore grow in
power. At the 1992 Democratic Convention Opperman had described
himself as a “political junkie” who enjoyed hosting political
receptions for fun. “I don’t expect to get any political benefits out of
them.”[6.52]
Replying on February 22, 1995, to questions from the Minneapolis
Star Tribune, Opperman’s company noted that all donations were
legal and on record at the Federal Election Commission. “It appears
that you believe the laws regarding these matters should be
changed,” West said. “If so, the proper thing for you to do is to seek
to change these laws rather than criticize those who carefully comply

with existing law.” The company denied any efforts to influence
officials improperly. West said that its employees, its political-action
committee, and its counsel all had “long histories of being active in
the political process. It is inaccurate to tie their donations over the
past 20 years to any specific issue of legislation pending before a
government body. Your inference that such donations have been
made as one collective effort is also totally untrue.”[6.53]
West pointed out to the Star Tribune that people from rival
information companies were also making contributions. But of
course! Money always counted in politics. Vance Opperman had put
it well several years ago as head of Opperman Heins&Paquin, a
leading law firm notable for PAC gifts to Minneapolis politicians. “If
we have those who oppose the interests of our clients,” he said, “we
do not support them.” He said the law firm’s PAC ran under this
philosophy: “Support your friends. Punish your enemies.”[6.54]
Presumably Bill Clinton and Al Gore would rather avoid
punishment from the Oppermans of this nation. While almost
ignoring librarians and educators, the Administration had appointed
to its Advisory Council some members of the elite who were already
over-represented in the political process. Did Vance Opperman, as a
friend of Gore’s, really have to worry about the Vice President
reading his letters? I wouldn’t have been surprised if he had Gore’s
private e-mail address. Just how many electronic entreaties to the
Hill, or to the Clinton-Gore area on the Web, would it take to
neutralize the little fortune donated by friends of West Publishing? I
couldn’t have agreed more with Cliff Stoll when he wrote that
Washington often ignored citizens’ e-mail. It all figured. The Power
People were too busy raising donations from millionaires and
political-action committees—hardly the biggest champions of low-
cost knowledge.
Granted, some optimists hoped that the Internet itself could help
turn around Washington. Aided by the Net, a group in Washington
State had gathered $26,000 to help defeat Tom Foley, then the
Democratic Speaker of the House. And NewtWatch, an anti-Gingrich
effort on the World Wide Web, had registered as a political-action

committee. Some members of both major parties were hoping to
use the Net to raise money efficiently from small donors.[6.55]
That was far from a full answer, though. Even before I learned of
all the campaign cash from some members of the Advisory Council, I
had wondered about the group’s odd composition. Not everyone on
the council was rich, of course, far from it. But why had business
prevailed so brazenly over the general public and Al Gore’s little
neighbor back in Tennessee, the one who was supposed to dial up
books from the Library of Congress regardless of family income? Just
one teacher and one librarian? In politer language I’d sent the
question on to a White House staffer, and he had patiently explained
to me that Washington had to serve the needs of the “stakeholders.”
I loved the word. It sounded so innocent, so natural, so
philosophical. What if this were eighteenth-century France, the
revolution were on, and Marie Antoinette looked like guillotine
fodder? Armed with such a marvelous locution, she could forego all
references to bread and cake and simply say, “Stop! I’m one of the
stakeholders.”
Now having documented a nice flow of money from “stakeholders”
to politicians, especially Democrats, I remembered how many
Watergate-era ambassadorships had gone to the highest bidders.
Wasn’t the same ethos at work here as Richard Nixon’s? I knew of
no broken laws—but perhaps that was the trouble.
“I remember when I got on Energy and Commerce, everybody
jumped for the Telecommunications Subcommittee first,” Peter
Kostmayer, a former Democratic representative from Pennsylvania,
said as quoted by veteran political journalist Martin Schram. “There
was a member sitting next to me, and every time another member
bid for that committee, he went ‘Ding!’—as if a cash register was
going off.”[6.56] When politicians talked about the need for election
reform and clean, ethical government, many were themselves
superb examples of the need for action.
Maybe, I’d thought earlier, I could at least enjoy an open-minded
hearing from a nonmillionaire on the Advisory Council. Bonnie Bracey
was the only elementary school teacher. She should have loved
TeleRead.

But during an official virtual conference organized on the Net by
the Commerce Department, she went after not Opperman but me. “I
am not the least interested in the TeleReader, ” she said in a public
message, “and I don’t have any money after trying to do this job to
invest anyway. ” I was and am a writer. Last I knew, I had not been
selling computers. Bracey needed to scrutinize my proposal. Maybe
she could then dismiss it as a nefarious writer’s plot. TeleRead did,
after all, propose a massive shifting of resources from bureaucracy
to various forms of knowledge, including—gasp! —electronic books.
At times, Bracey would e-mail me that my proposal intrigued her,
but somehow she would never get around to study it, or at least to
telling me that she had gone beyond summaries. She would repeat
the usual clichés that citizens didn’t want to spend money on
schools. Toward TeleRead’s cost-justification mechanisms, toward
the support that it could win among frugal, business-oriented
conservatives such as William Buckley, she was unresponsive.
Granted, she wasn’t callous about the children TeleRead could help.
At the personal level she had been exemplary, spending hundreds
and perhaps thousands of dollars on hardware and software that she
could use in her classes. But TeleRead for her could have been a
bother. Offensively, perhaps, it meant a national library online for all,
regardless of whether they happened to be students anywhere.
TeleRead, however, was hardly antischool, given all the new
possibilities it could open up online for teachers and students.
Looking back, I just wished that Bracey had seen a note I received
from a teacher in Illinois who had asked more than sixty magazines
for permission to reprint articles for her small class at no profit. Only
twenty-five publications had gone along. “We were ignored
sometimes, ” the woman had e-mailed me, “and once I was told, by
phone, never to use any articles from that publication. That was
Windows Magazine, and I didn’t renew my subscription. ” Of her
anthology, she had said: “It’s a better textbook because it’s more up
to date. ” Clearly we could never separate “educational” uses of the
NII from the rest; an article from a commercial magazine could
actually prove so much more valuable than an instantly obsolete
textbook. TeleRead would make back issues of magazines available

for free, make current ones easier to obtain, and, above all, allow
free textbooks to be updated instantly, complete with hypertext links
to the rest of the national library.
But predictably the NII Advisory Council ignored TeleRead and
more or less green-lighted the Green Paper. The council for the most
part came out in favor of publishers enjoying control over
transmission rights. In effect these people were kissing off the idea
of a comprehensive, cost-justified library that all Americans could
afford to use online, whether for school or for self-improvement. As I
was concluding this book, it wasn’t certain that the Green Paper
would slither its way into law in more or less the original form. But
the news from Capitol Hill didn’t cheer me. The Republican Congress
appeared to be at least as skewed in favor of copyright holders as
were the Democrats.
Even diluted ( and renamed the White Paper in the final version ),
the Green Paper might well be a disgrace. I worried about the rest of
the world. Imagine the Australians or Europeans looking to the
United States for leadership in Net-related copyright matters. To me,
the Green Paper bore the stains of greenbacks. People around D. C.
had a polite little word, “access. ” It didn’t mean legal violations, but
rather purchases of policymakers’ ears. Information magnates had
access. I wondered if the little child in Al Gore’s hometown gave so
faithfully to major politicians, flew Supreme Court justices to Hawaii,
and doled out $ 15, 000 “justice” awards.
The Green Paper, alas, was just one indication of many big shots’
willingness to work against the citizenry. Again and again the
denizens of Capitol Hill bragged about Americans being able to dial
up the text of proposed legislation through a service called Thomas.
And yet some Congress members still hoped to work out deals
before the public saw the results on the Net. Friends of West
Publishing used exactly such tactics on the Hill to try to reduce the
amount of information that the government released for free. West
and similar companies wanted to be able to profit off public data. So
their congressional allies were hoping to cancel out the Freedom of
Information Act in cases where federal contractors had created
records.

Any weakening of the act would make me very grouchy; it had
opened up many kind of government information for free or at
affordable costs. I had benefited. Two decades ago the General
Services Administration had tried unsuccessfully to charge me
$20,000 to learn details about the government’s office-leasing
program. Using this first-class muck, I had shown that then-Senator
Abraham Ribicoff secretly owned a stake in a building that the GSA
leased for the Central Intelligence Agency. I had learned, too, of a
friend of Spiro Agnew who had been able to avoid building a half-
million-dollar cafeteria required by the lease for the headquarters
building of the Environmental Protection Agency. Because of the
Information Act, I had been able to report both stories and get them
out in the press and on network television. I had spent months
camped out at the GSA, perusing documents; imagine what I could
have done with a computer to ferret out digitized muck. And so I
was dismayed to learn that some in Congress wanted to weaken the
Information Act—this in an era when the Internet supposedly would
open up Washington. If not fully Orwellian, such hypocrisy didn’t
promote democratic alternatives to Big Brother.
Uppity activists used the Net to thwart West at least for the
moment. A bill introduced by Representative William Clinger, a
Republican from Pennsylvania, was to be heard in a subcommittee
and rushed through a committee edit in just a few days with West-
friendly provisions. But James Love of the Taxpayer Assets Project
caught wind of the shenanigans; Jim Warren pitched in with his own
jeremiads in Government Access, his online newsletter; and furious
Netfolks called and faxed the Hill. West may have really lost when
the Republicans found out through the Internet about the firm’s
generosity toward the Democratic Party, to which its executives gave
far more than to the competition. “Why are we doing this?” the
Republicans, in effect, may have wondered.
Only because of some extraordinary diligence by Love and allies
did the public win here. Newt Gingrich could talk all he wanted about
the Net putting citizens and lobbyists on an equal footing, but
without a constant watch on the Hill, scene of so many crimes, the

same power cliques would keep winning again and again, banana-
republic fashion. West might yet succeed.
Around this same time, Sally Katzen, a top bureaucrat with
Clinton’s Office of Management and Budget had asked Congress to
make certain that the Feds could charge more for information in
some cases than the cost of spreading it. They would be able to do
this after posting notices in the Federal Register. And then, if
insufficient protests ensued, the info-gouges could begin. Katzen’s
proposal didn’t fly, but its very existence was bothersome enough.
The idea hardly jibed with all the nice rhetoric from the White House
about using the Net to promote open government. So much for
freedom of information, Clinton style.
Meanwhile I forged ahead with my TeleRead efforts, perhaps not
for this Congress and this White House, but maybe for those in the
future—once enough voters understood that we mustn’t replicate
online the “savage inequalities” of our schools and libraries.
TeleRead if nothing else was a handy litmus test to find out which
policymakers were sincere when they talked about the need for true
public libraries in cyberspace, as opposed to just digital storefronts
with links to publishers. Good people could disagree with me. But
when politicians and their flunkies did not bother to hear me out
despite my idea’s credentials, I was reminded of how democratic
Washington was toward Power People and how oligarchic it was
toward the rest of the cosmos. Sometimes I felt that my location, in
Alexandria, Virginia, was metaphorical. My apartment was just inside
the Washington Beltway.
The question of the moment wasn’t just one of copyright. It was
also one of democracy itself, both the decision process and the
aftermath. What about the Copyright Gestapo? In the future might
the Feds monitor the activities of Republicans more closely than they
would those of Democrats? Would Republicans be more susceptible
to charges of intellectual piracy when they did the inevitable and
tried to share old newspaper clips over the Net? Or vice versa?
Would the Democrats suffer discrimination? What about Italy, where
the machine-gun-toting cops had invoked software piracy laws
against leftist bulletin boards but not against conservative ones? But

the Clintonians, so eager to serve their political friends, were just as
cavalier toward these possibilities as toward the civil liberties risk of
Clipper.
Ultimately the copyright-holders’ victory just might be Pyrrhic.
Someday the political terrain could shift and millions of children
might grow up on free, government-commissioned books. Or,
perhaps instead, videos in too many cases would replace text. So we
were better off if, as soon as possible, we used networks to spread
privately originated books through a free, well-stocked library
system. TeleRead could indeed help many in the information
industry. From Lexis-Nexis to Random House, companies could turn
profits off dial-up fees, either from works they commissioned directly
or from rights they bought from authors. TeleRead wasn’t a threat to
information companies if they truly added value such as editing or
marketing. Even West could benefit. TeleRead would let Opperman’s
company reap many millions off dial-up rights—not only to legal
writings but also to other kinds—if the market favored it.
No, the real losers would be the bureaucrats, whose work, after
all, would be less in demand in an era of electronic forms in mass
use. And even they could have a soft landing. TeleRead would hardly
take place instantly, and it would remove much of the scut work
from the remaining jobs in government. TeleRead was anti-
bureaucracy, not anti-bureaucrat. For the moment, however, as
shown by the obtuseness of the GSA man at the hearing, the
resistance was there.
Some lessons were emerging. Hundreds of people had e-mailed
me for copies of TeleRead. “Even anti-taxers like me would be willing
to foot the bill for something so practical and knowledge infectious,”
a home schooler in Illinois had said. The head of the Digital
Publishing Association, an organization consisting mostly of small
publishers and writers, had loved TeleRead. “Instead of flooding the
young mind with yet another sitcom or soap,” he had said, “TeleRead
would allow video to present them with quality reading materials.”
And yet our wishes had not meant squat.
David Lytel, the White House staffer, may have pressed his delete
key almost as soon as the TeleRead proposal reached him over the

Net. He and his colleagues at the Lehman hearings hadn’t followed
up my official testimony with a single question in person or by phone
or e-mail. The hearings had been a big farce, a caricature of a public
relations exercise. I might as well have been Winston Smith
deviating from the plot and making a few friendly suggestions to one
of Big Brother’s TV cameras. No one would shoot or torture me for
saying the wrong things, but on the major NII issues the Clinton
people were about as open as Big Brother to ideas from below, Net
or no Net.
I wasn’t the only writer with a few feelings on the subject of
Executive listening skills in this networked era. A New York Times
columnist later told how cavalier the White House crowd had been
toward the e-mail from her. I’d actually gotten farther than she had.
At least Gore had sent me a higher class of boilerplate. Perhaps that
was because I had actually used conventional rather than electronic
mail, and had enclosed a photocopy of a TeleRead article from the
Washington Post. Article or not, however, the White House had
thumbed its nose at me. While Clinton and Gore couldn’t reply to
every citizen, the composition of the citizens’ advisory council had
made clear what the NII priorities were, even in the age of Cyber
Socks: Big Government serving Big Business.
Clinton-Gore had better change if they wanted my vote in ’96.
Rather than just sharing Sock’s meows and feeling ever so smug
about high-tech democracy, they needed to spend time more
listening to us nonlobbyists and a little less time keeping Vance
Opperman happy. Democracy should not mean just a dialogue
between the White House and the usual “stakeholders.”
As is obvious by now, intrusive government officials love to fixate
on net. sex. But something else is happening as shown in the next
chapter: net. love. Let’s hope that Exon and company can tell the
difference.

CHAPTER
SEVEN
The Electronic
Matchmaker
Gregory Smith* had yet to kiss Susan Olson* good night or run his
fingers through her hair. But he could do something else with his
fingers: type to her. Greg was a library and information-management
student in Adelaide in South Australia, she worked for a real estate
firm in Kansas City, Missouri, and they were carrying on a romance
by way of the Internet. “We write letters constantly,” he said, “and
exchange our thoughts on newspaper clippings, music, all manner of
things. About the only thing we haven’t exchanged are marriage
vows.”
The outcome, as I began this chapter, wasn’t clear. If the Smith-
Olson affair was like many on the Net, they would pull the plug long
before all the typing destroyed their wrists. “For every good story,”
Greg said of love on the Internet, “there are at least 100 bad stories
—people meeting and realizing there’s a major difference between
virtuality and reality.” A few months later, I decided, I would check
back in with Greg and Sue and report the results at the end of “The
Electronic Matchmaker.”
For the moment I was optimistic. Greg and Sue had been at this
for a good two years; they spent several hours a day pouring out
their thoughts to each other, Greg at his UNIX workstation, Sue at
her lowly Packard Bell computer. He had bought her a diamond ring
on a layaway plan; she was giving him a ring. She would fly Down

Under at some point, and then the next summer, Greg would to go
to Kansas City and meet Sue’s family, including her father, a retired
auto worker who, ah, had a few surprises ahead.
I think of good people like Greg and Sue when I read the tacky,
hacky stories about unhappy affairs online and Net sex. While many
politicians and reporters delve into the sleazier areas of the Internet
—and, yes, regions can look like Silicon-era Sodoms—something
wonderful is also happening on the Net. It’s connecting lovers with
uncannily matched interests and values. Remember, the Internet
teems with more than 12,000 newsgroups. If you’re quirky and
picky, if you insist on a lover whose hobby is Esperanto, the
international language, try soc. culture. esperanto. If you want to find
a fellow Peace Corps alumnus, you can choose from among several
newsgroups and lists. If you’re a Libertarian stalwart and insist that
your girlfriend be nothing but—well, the search may take longer.
Some philosophies just don’t hold out as much appeal to women
as do others. But that has not daunted a smart young Libertarian in
California, Eric Klien, who started what may have been the Internet’s
first matchmaking service, an operation later taken over by Electric
Classifieds. Match. Com offers a long questionnaire that should
appeal to many of the detail-oriented habitués of the Internet.
Whatever your taste, the Net probably has a dating service if
that’s what you want. Operating with a French address on the World
Wide Web, Babb’s Personals shows up with a photo of a green-eyed,
dark-complected woman, and a number of free, anonymous ads in
French and English. Christie’s Internet MatchMaker claims to reach
more than 14,000 users in seventeen cities. On the Net, too, you’ll
find HIV Positive Dating Services (“Meet other positives, negatives,
and neutrals locally, regionally, nationally, and even globally”), Web
Personals (“Now over 4,200 different visitors each day!”), and Virtual
MeetMarket (“I believe that the people who browse through here,
and more importantly the people who bother to publish personals
here, are somewhat intelligent and Internet-savvy enough to know
the difference between FTP and FTD—you know, the flower delivery
guys?”).

I found some of the catchiest ads on Virtual. One showed a
beautiful twenty-five-year-old brunette in Los Angeles touching an
empty set of casual clothes labeled “Your picture here?” “I’m looking
for somebody who’s [sic] personality has a shelf life longer than a
month,” she said, and California spelling notwithstanding, she clearly
deserved just that sort of person. A graduate student, hungering for
a “sweet SWM of my dreams,” inserted a picture of a knight in
armor. Seeking “a Scandinavian beauty,” a graphics designer from
South Carolina posted an almost magazine-quality layout with
photos of himself and his cats and even an aerial shot of Charleston.
The prose wasn’t the most imaginative, and his Scandinavian
requirement was rather limiting, but in a flash the ad showed
women what kind of life he could offer them. Other possibilities exist
on the Web. Instead of just saying you like certain musicians or
artists, for example, you might write Web links to take people to an
area with sound or graphics files.
The best matchmaker is the Internet itself, with all its ways of
bringing well-meaning people together. If Greg married Sue, this
would hardly be the first Australian-American marriage born on the
Net. Australia is the e-mail capital of the universe, or at least the
romantic regions thereof. Until surpassed by the United Kingdom and
Canada, Australia had more Net connections than any country
except for the United States. Recently the Aussies’ telcom people
started charging institutions for net connections according to the
amount of use, and that just might crimp future Gregs and Sues. But
at least in mid-1995, Australia’s e-mail laurels remain unthreatened.
American women love Australian men because they speak the
same language—more wittily than we Yanks do, of course—and
because they all carry huge knives with which they can defend their
girlfriends against crocodiles and muggers. Isn’t that so, just as in
the movies? American men worship Australian women because we
know they are unappreciated down on the sheep ranch, they’re
literate, and have brilliant careers ahead of them. Don’t knock
stereotypes if they help bring the right people together.
The film Crocodile Dundee may or may not have been on the mind
of Laura Goodin when she was wandering through

soc. culture. australian. She saw “a message from an Australian
composer studying in the U. S.,” who told of “an alternative tune to
‘Waltzing Matilda.’” Laura asked for the music. Within months the
Aussie proposed, right over the Net in the same newsgroup.
“Congratulatory messages came from all over the United States,
Australia, and New Zealand.” Today Laura Goodin and Houston
Dunleavy are married and living together in the Washington, D. C.,
area, with a baby on the way. They exchanged more than 1,500
messages during their courtship, not to mention countless sessions
of typing together in Teletype fashion, just as Greg and Sue have
done. It is not the same as talking the old-fashioned way but can
save enough in phone bills to pay for an engagement ring or maybe
a more powerful computer. “A long-distance relationship is hellish,”
Laura says, “but the pain is eased somewhat by the Internet.”[7.1]
This isn’t just happening on the Internet itself. When a New York
City woman was testing a service that became America Online,
marriage was the last thing on her mind. Nevertheless she ended up
married in Virginia to a lover she met via e-mail. Rush Limbaugh, the
conservative radio host, met his wife on CompuServe, where,
supposedly, she had sought his advice on coping with a liberal
professor. A chef and a substitute teacher met on Prodigy and flew
off to Las Vegas together, thinking they would enjoy the video poker
if nothing else; they won $4,000 and each other.[7.2]
A psychiatrist has even written a novel about online relationships,
Virtual Love. “E-mail has been called the singles bar of the 90’s,” Dr.
Avodah Offit told the New York Times. “And that concept intrigues
me a lot. The traditional ways that people meet now do not allow
much access to each other’s minds, and that has not led to enduring
relationships.” What’s the best place to find out about your potential
spouse? By sitting silently through movies or boozing it up in noisy,
smoky nightspots, or by sharing intimacies over the modem? “I find
people are more open on e-mail,” she says. And I agree.
The Internet, to be sure, is hardly a romantic nirvana, and
although this chapter will be positive about net romance for the
most part, I’ll mix the praise with some lengthy warnings. Some
sections of the Net will please fundamentalist preachers no more

than will the red-light areas of New York or Calcutta. From
alt. sex. bondage I called up a digitized photo fit for the Marquis de
Sade. The caption accurately read, “Japanese girl tied to rack while
master pours hot wax on her breast. Looks very painful and her face
shows it.” Just about all of those posting to the forum are male
despite the heterosexual orientation of the typical messages. This
area of the Net is about as woman friendly as Hustler. Offensively,
too, the Internet also comes with sections devoted to bestiality, and,
yes, discussion of adult-child sex. In every case, of course, society
must distinguish between shared fantasies and real acts. (As
indicated in chapter 6, Exonian laws aren’t the solution—parental
vigilance and access-control software are.)
A more serious worry, from the viewpoint of women hoping for
romance on the Internet, is the locker-room attitudes that can show
up even in some respectable areas. Consider the cause of this: the
numbers.
If you go by one network veteran, fewer than one in twenty of the
early Netfolks were female. By popular belief, maybe a tenth of the
people on the Net are female, a far smaller percentage than on
other services such as Prodigy and America Online. The truth,
however, is a bit more complicated. John Quarterman and Smoot
Carl-Mitchell of Texas Internet Consulting, which regularly tracks the
demographics of the Net, reported in the May 1995 issue of their
publication Matrix News that according to a survey in October 1994,
64 percent of Netfolks were male and 36 percent female. And
among educational institutions the percentage of females was as
high as 41 percent. Borders between the Internet and commercial
services are breaking down Berlin Wall fashion, so you can expect
the Internet to show an increasing amount of female influence.
The old stereotype, however, that the Net is male dominated,
would seem to hold up for the moment. Even the virtual dating
services tend to have far, far more men than women despite, in
some cases, better terms for female customers.
The reasons for the ratios are world famous. Computers in the
past were to girls what trucks and catchers’ mitts were also: the
province of boys. Thousands of men in the computer industry are

still oblivious to the existence of another sex. When I write popular-
level computer books, male editors often demand that I stick to the
technology rather than show how people use it. Most women,
however, recoil from the Internet and other high tech unless they
see practical reasons for bothering with UNIX commands and similar
horrors; they have been raised to favor humans over gadgetry. Let’s
hope that the old fears vanish as more women befriend computers
and programs grow easier for both genders.
Meanwhile, however, on some areas of the Internet, women can
be treated like females in Asian countries that pamper baby boys but
all too often let sickly girls die or even kill the fetuses. A few men
ignore female Netfolks except for purposes of humiliation, sex, or
combinations of the two. Although messages from women tend to
draw more replies on the Net than those from males, the end results
can dismay; one man reportedly welcomed a woman to a discussion
group, launched a political dialogue, then shifted in a nanosecond to
a request for a swap of nude pictures. Women tell of weirdoes
stalking them via e-mail, flooding their Net accounts with unwanted
messages. One victim, as reported in Mother Jones magazine,
suffered “an untraceable e-mail ‘bomb’ containing hundreds of
sexual and violent messages, the mildest of which was ‘Shut up
bitch.‘”
At the same time women on the Internet can enjoy less of the sort
of attention they desire. Some Netfolks don’t pay as much attention
to the public messages of women, and besides, female Internauts
may not want to post anyway in some areas, given the outright
insults and sarcasm that may await them. Women seek harmony and
compromise; much of the Net thrives on controversy.
My wife, who, like most of her gender on the Internet, hates flame
wars, has even run across a newsgroup whose people venture forth
to start arguments in other groups. What is a hobby to some men
can be an antisocial practice to women. Many women hesitate to
speak up on the Net, whatever the topic under discussion.
Disturbing statistics come from Gladys We, a graduate student at
Simon Fraser University in Vancouver, Canada. Writing in the
magazine Virtual Culture, she says at least four-fifths of several

hundred postings to alt. feminism were by men. She tallied figures
almost as lopsided in soc. women. “Only in soc. feminism,” We writes,
“amid accusations of censorship, were there comparable numbers of
postings from women and men.”
Given the obstacles that women often face on the Internet, then,
it is amazing at times that any romances happen there. When they
do, yet another danger arises—the risk of missed cues. A friendship
online may cause either sex to ignore mismatched words and
gestures that might put them on guard. One Los Angeles women
met her boyfriend on a BBS and suffered a disaster that could just
as well have happened by way of the Net. He got her pregnant,
begged her not to abort, married her, and made life a real hell, not
just a virtual one, until they divorced.
Worrisome, too, are the eternal tensions that go on in cyberspace
between sincere Befrienders and not-so-sincere Gamesplayers, who
the former have trouble detecting. The Befrienders seek friends and
lovers; the Gamesplayers would just as soon toy with a human as
hack a program. An argument might even be made that high tech
attracts more than its share of people who thrive on impermanence.
You do not last long in computers if you believe that Pentium-level
chips are forever, or that 28.8K-bps modems are more than
throwaway technology in the general scheme of things. Faster chips,
higher speed modems, and new girlfriends or boyfriends are sure to
come along. That’s the mind-set. Let’s just hope that the girlfriends
and boyfriends will last.
“I am burning with a need to talk with you, to share with you my
fears, my joys,” one Australian women cooed via modem to a man in
the Canadian province of Alberta. Within two weeks her ardor did
not just cool, it inexplicably froze. “This is the very last time I will
write to you,” she said. Very possibly—we can’t say for sure without
ESP—the Australian woman was a Gamesplayer.
Gamesplayers enjoy at least one big advantage on the Internet.
They can post their electronic want ads through computers, known
as anonymous servers, that strip their names and other
compromising identifiers.[7.3] And replies can come through
anonymous servers. The same technology used to protect privacy

can let Gamesplayers fool victim after victim, and even mask
genders. Particularly in fantasy games on the Net you can never be
sure if you’re typing to a woman or a man who just wants more
attention—abusive or not. What’s more, for the skillful there are
ways to forge messages to unsuspecting neophytes.
Another negative is that the Net can be as helpful to adulterers as
to the moral and sincere. A techie has just poured out to me a story
of the kind that Carson McCullers would have written if she had
fixated on the Internet rather than on the American South. His wife,
the mother of two children, has been using the Net to cheat on him
in a massive way. She befriended two alcoholics by way of her
modem, the marriage counselor says he has done all he could, and
now comes word that she just might have the AIDS virus; I hear it’s
too early for a conclusive HIV test.
If sexual excitement is the only goal of certain Netfolks, and if the
crowd in alt. sex. wanted is too creepy, some professional women just
might meet their needs. As noted earlier in this book, a little outfit
called Brandy’s Babes advertised on the World Wide Web—complete
with hints of more than just visual stimuli. The babes are apparently
off the Net now, but some would say that successors are inevitable.
In limited ways the Net and the world of professional sex are much
alike: both have their jargon and, for those who seek it, their
anonymity.
Both worlds are rich in eccentrics. For example, I recently ran
across a woman in her late forties who was about to bear a baby
with a computer scientist she met on the Net “an hour before April
Fool’s Day. ” She says the child was accidentally “conceived about two
weeks after meeting ‘in the flesh. ’ We are having the baby first. Then
we will talk about marriage on a serious basis. I’m delighted at the
prospect of being a mum at last, and I am not your average clunky
woman at all. I generally feel much better about myself. I introduced
Tom to sex, and he says he had no idea how cuddle-deprived he
was. He’s now quite addicted to me. ” Tom and his computer are now
part of her household; like many Netfolks he can use his modem to
work virtually anywhere, which in some cases is yet another
advantage of online romance.

Like most denizens of the Internet, the e-mail lovers just
mentioned are well educated. And, although the woman was
between jobs, Netfolks are normally at least affluent. If they are
students, their parents are middle class or better. While the price of
Internet service is coming down, and while access is free in some
cities and at many American colleges, the Net doesn’t exactly teem
with welfare mothers.
So what other patterns emerge among lovers who meet through
the Net? “I haven’t done a study of the personality curve, the
introvert-extrovert ratio,” Avodah Offit, the psychiatrist who wrote
Virtual Love, told me, “but my experience is just the opposite of
what one might expect My ‘high user’ contacts are all very sociable
types who hate being out of contact with others at any time of day
or night. Of course my correspondents are not generally engaged in
romance with me, but they do write to others online in a variety of
relationships.” My own observations suggest that while many
net. lovers may be introverts, her thoughts would hold true.
Judging from lovers whose photos I’ve seen, the plugged-in
couples are neither more nor less attractive than the world at large.
But the plainer ones can use prose to compensate for looks; this is a
medium where words are everything.
I hope that the people’s love letters don’t just vanish, because the
output of some Netfolks can be charmingly Victorian in style, feeling,
or sheer volume. “My family took it pretty hard at first and were a bit
skeptical, especially my Mum,” says an Australian college student
who fell in love with an American more than a decade older than she
is, ”but then I gave them some of the early letters to read, a pile of
100, the only ones I had time to print out, and the next day my
mother came up to me and said, ‘I am very happy for you. I am glad
you have Frank.’ I was waiting for the ‘But,’ but it never came.” A
New England woman, who married a fellow clarinet player she met
on the Internet, says he once showed her a $1,000-plus telephone
bill. That’s Love, capital L. Maybe the nineteenth century is alive in
some quarters, whatever the medium, voice or e-mail.
Below I’ll tell stories of Greg and Sue; a bachelor who was looking
for a woman who wouldn’t treat him like “a peripheral”; and a man

who, to his distress, found himself cuckolded more easily because
his wife was on the Net.
Greg and
Sue
Adelaide was where Greg Smith majored in library studies at the
University of South Australia. It was a graceful port and state capital
with a Mediterranean climate, a population of a million, the Torrens
River in the center, and swarms of college students from three
schools. Named for Queen Adelaide, the wife of England’s King
William IV, the city dated back to the 1830s. Kangaroos still hopped
around in the countryside, but Adelaide itself was both urban and
urbane. It was full of churches and bars alike, along with trendy
shops in Rundle Mall and elsewhere. The State Theater put on
Shakespearean plays at an internationally known festival center.
Not surprisingly, Adelaide has been described as the Boston of
South Australia. While some young locals may shrug off the place as
too churchy and sleepy, others might disagree. Adelaide in many
ways is a young person’s town—a good place to meet the opposite
sex. Greg Smith, in fact, did find women in the corporeal world
around him, but the relationships never took root, and in the early
1990s he was still on the lookout in the bars (“universities are great
for this”), the parks, the buses, the mall—you name it. He had his
attractions. Greg, in fact, was on the handsome side, if you went by
the digitized photo and other information conveyed over the Net. He
stood six-foot four, weighed around 190, kept in shape by walking,
and had thick, dark brown hair, and a winsome smile.
“I’m a physical person,” Greg told me. “I like to be with people. I
like ‘reading’ people for body language and all that.” From the very
start he was aware of the perils and limitations of the Internet in
such areas as love. You had to trust the words of strangers, not
sharing their own reality. “Relationships are established where one

party is totally sincere and all that, and the other one is just getting
a laugh out of it.” Just the same, he could not resist touring the
Internet and the bulletin board to which his international
connections led.
Young people like Greg Smith, who sought out new places on the
Net, whether bulletin boards or electronic libraries, were vaguely like
the Jack Kerouacs of the ’50s who liked bumming around the United
States for its own sake. Some would describe the high-tech Kerouacs
as “net surfers.” But the phrase “net surfing” has become so
trivialized in the media that perhaps we should return to the Kerouac
analogy.[7.4] Kerouing, not surfing. Stark differences, of course,
existed between the international Internet and the American towns
of On the Road, the famous Kerouac novel. Greg had spent some
time in the United States when he was ten years old and loved to
keep up with American sports, but he was very much a creature of
Australia, with a distinctly Aussie flavor in his accent and values. Nor
was he a rebel in the true Kerouac tradition. You could be a library
science major and still soak up the culture of the Net; you didn’t
have to hop on and off freight trains and risk poverty or a severed
leg.
In fact, while hooked into an established institution such as a
corporation or a university, you just might do better than if you had
to buy all the gadgetry yourself—just so you didn’t flunk out while
you were partaking. A teacher might even encourage your
wanderings. And that was how Greg ended up on the Net for the
first time in 1992. He found himself logging onto electronic bulletin
boards all over the planet, with bizarre names such as “Badboy’s
Better BBS System” or “Chatsubo.” He was at least partly drawn to
such places because they were so much like neighborhoods or small
towns. Each came with its own set of friendships, love affairs, and
feuds that could reach an intensity even greater than those on the
discussion areas of the main Net.
The woman who married Rush Limbaugh is said to have
exchanged tart words with Limbaugh on CompuServe at the start of
their relationship, and the same happened with Greg and Sue. They
did not attempt an alt. personals-style romance. Via Chatsubo he and

she were just patterns of dots on each other’s cathode ray tubes. In
fact, the two even butted heads over the question of whether certain
people were abusing computer resources.
Sue, it should be noted, was not a true technophile; she could fire
up a modem and use easy UNIX commands and that was about it.
Even so, the two shared much else. Greg was around twenty at the
time, just a year or so older than she was. Sue was a college
student, at Northwestern Missouri State University. “I like her
intensity, her sarcastic wit, her humor, and her, I dunno, just her way
of seeing things,” Greg would say of the Sue he came to know.
“Politically we’re very similar, as regards political policy and all that.
Our tastes in music are close. Our pleasures are drawn from simple,
similar things. For example, we are both mad about long walks, NFL
football, curling up in front of fires, walking in the mall, playing in
the rain, and on and on it goes.” Sue had been thinking about
teaching, among other possible careers (political work and
diplomacy happened to be others), and she enjoyed museums.
Greg’s father had taught Shakespeare once, and his mother had also
been a teacher. So while nothing Oedipal was at work here, Greg
might well be more comfortable with a woman who shared familiar
priorities.
Just as important, both Greg and Sue could breeze along on a
keyboard and say plenty online. In the near future, people might be
able to speak into a microphone with those at the other end seeing
words pop up on the screen, but for the moment the Net was
friendliest to good typists, especially those who could write well, as
Greg and Sue could. They could almost be playwrights, the way they
loved stage directions such as “Hugs” and “Wave good-byes.” If a
feeling occurred to either, they could transfer it from their brain cells
to the keyboard and make the recipient see their thoughts. When
Sue sent a letter to Greg and me, it was obvious she wanted to get
back to her private correspondence with him. She ended her note:
“*hugs greg* hold your horses sweetie, I’m typing as fast as I can:-).” I could see that techie or not, Sue felt at home at the computer
keyboard.

Without trying to woo each other across fourteen time zones, the
two friends grew closer as they made the rounds of the BBSs on the
Net. One of the boards carried a gallery of digitized photos, and
Greg enjoyed Sue’s face. The look was American-Midwestern. Her
light blonde hair flowed in a way that must have pleased him.[7.5] She
had green eyes broken up with what she has described as a “strange
shade of yellow.” The skin was pale, the Scandinavian in her. In one
of the shots she posed with a knee resting on a well-padded
armchair. She wore a crocheted sweater, pants, and flats, and looked
sexy but in a fresh, friendly way that would not have threatened a
schoolteacher’s son. Greg, in turn, pleased Sue; in fact, even more
so later on when she learned of his height; she herself stood five-
feet ten and favored tall men.
Sue especially relished his sense of humor. “I could log in after a
totally crappy day in classes and I’d have some corny e-mail from
Greg that would send a smile to my face no matter what I felt like.
He was, still is, and probably will be, the only person who can really
cheer me up no matter what the circumstances are.” Love, however,
just wasn’t on the minds of Greg and Sue in those early days. She
had family and friends in Kansas City and counted on braving the
frigid Missouri winters while she went to college. Meanwhile she had
experienced her share of romances off the Net, including one with a
shy friend who helped introduce her to the online world by
suggesting that they type to each other. Sue may or may not have
been ready for yet another relationship.
Even if she and Greg were just friends, they were paving the way
for something more by slowly trading secrets about themselves. Lois
Shawver, a California psychologist often online, warned me of the
lack of trust that can afflict many long-distance relationships via
computer. And yet paradoxically, the Net could bring people closer to
each other. “It’s so easy to end a relationship,” Shawver told me,
“you simply stop corresponding.” So “people seem to be more willing
to take a chance and disclose intimately. That helps to create trust. I
do think that also explains the medium’s ability to help people bridge
cultural gaps.” It was all certainly true in the case of Sue and Greg.

Helpful, too, was the emphasis that they placed on the platonic at
the start, without even meaning to do so. Is it just possible that
horny young men and women on the Internet and elsewhere could
declare a one-year moratorium on the raunchier forms of “cybersex”
where men and women exchanged lewd remarks with each other,
Teletype fashion, in group settings? Ditto for the online world’s many
homosexuals and bisexuals. Ironically the aftermath might be more
sex and better sex after some true friendships developed by way of
electronic mail and one-to-one chats. One test of friendship, of
course, might be this: Would a couple still write to each other if their
Net connection ended? And Sue and Greg had passed so far: Her
Internet account had vanished after she left Northwestern Missouri
State University to work and go to school part-time. She ended up at
an insurance company. Letters written on pulped trees, comic strips,
editorial cartoons, music cassettes, material of all kinds, had traveled
between Australia and Missouri. “We got closer and closer with each
postage stamp,” Sue told me, “and believe me, there were a bunch.
The post office likes me a lot.” Finally, however, Sue had returned to
the Net, this time with a private account
On August 7, 1994, she had to break off an online chat to leave
for work. “And I had one more question for her,” Greg recalled. “She
asked what it was. And I asked her plain and simple, ‘Will you marry
me?’ There was a pause of about thirty seconds, and she asked me
if I was serious. I said, ‘Yes, never more so,’ and she said ‘Yes.’” Sue
let her mother and a sister in on what was happening. She told
certain friends, too, but not her brother and father. “It’s just going to
be incomprehensible to them,” Greg told me, “that this could happen
over a chunk of cable. Add to that I’m stealing away their last child,
not just out of the home, or the state, but out of the country, and I
can understand why her father is not going to understand.”
The same shocks would presumably await Greg’s mum and dad. “I
think it’s more the medium than anything else. It’s way new to them,
but for me it’s just part of the way we do things now. *Grin*. Mum’s
department just got Lotus’ cc: Mail,[7.6] and she was telling me about
it and I was like ‘Yeah, so?’ but she was really excited about it.”
Although Greg did talk to Sue from home, not just his university, he

could do so without his parents knowing, because of the late hours
he keeps, and because he lived in a converted shed out back of his
house. I pondered the ironies here. Suddenly the Internet held out a
new peril for parents. Having fretted about electronic pornography,
Mom and Dad could now worry about children with more noble but
equally secret activities. Parents might erase porno from a hard
drive; it was not so easy to wipe out love as sincere and intense as
Greg and Sue’s.
But had the two actually talked, telephone style, over a real
phone? “We’ve had a grand total of one phone call,” Greg told me.
Sue dialed him up. He said she’d kept putting it off because she was
scared. “I know, I know,” he wrote, “we should talk more but I’m
just a poor student.” Greg inserted the computer symbol for a smile
to show he was kidding. “The one thing that surprised me about that
call was how naturally the conversation flowed. I think it came from
the fact that we are friends first and a couple second—that the
pressure of the relationship was negated by the fact that we are
such good friends. I seem to recall impressions more than anything
else, like the lilt of her laugh, the timbre of her voice, the accent. We
just talked about stuff—us, love, Clinton’s screwups in Congress,
sports, everything. Very tough to put the phone down.”
“Still,” I asked Sue by telephone, “won’t it be quite a transition
from the American Midwest to Australia?”
In a friendly, steady voice she told how she had overcome her
hesitations. When Sue toured the local museums now, she saw
graffiti on statues, and she said the neighborhoods were slipping. I
thought of my grandmother’s old place in Kansas City years ago,
how it had been block-busted by sleazes who frightened the whites
away and resold the houses at handsome profits to Afro-Americans.
Hotrods had roared up and down Chestnut Street; Grandma had
been the last white holdout. The memory still enraged me. Although
I hadn’t been to Kansas City in years, I believed Sue.
“My brother and sister are quite a bit older than I am,” she went
on, ”and they both have children of their own, and I’m not crazy
about the idea of leaving them to know their aunt through phone

calls and video tapes. But I have no intention of staying in the
Midwest just for my family’s sake.
“It’s my life and what I want to do requires more than the Midwest
has to offer. I can fit in well wherever I go. And I’ve gotten a few
books on Oz. From what I’ve read, I’ll like Australia just as long as I
don’t have to wear one of those damn hats and worship Paul Hogan.
I have Greg to worship. They may drive on the wrong side of the
road and drink beer with lunch, but it’s not like I’ll have to learn a
whole new language.” Besides, she loved the idea of the children
growing up with an accent as delightful as the one she heard from
Greg.
I asked Greg if his virtual romance with Sue had changed him.
“It’s relieved a lot of the pressure that exists between myself and
women, because it’s no longer that I’m looking for something more
than friendship—I have a relationship which satisfies those needs
and so don’t need anything from those friendships. What is most
interesting is that change that I haven’t picked up but that other
women must have. In the two-and-a-half years I’ve been at the
university, I’ve been ‘hit on’ a grand total of zero times that I can
remember. In the twenty days or so that I’ve been engaged, I’ve
been hit on three times. And for the life of me, I can’t figure out
exactly what is making women see me as attractive. And they
weren’t friends or acquaintances either—completely unknown to me.
Weird.”
So how much had Greg changed Sue? “A lot,” she e-mailed back.
Sue said: “Being with Greg has taught me, if anything else, that my
life doesn’t have any boundaries, be they physical or emotional or
geographic.” This was more than lover’s mush; I noticed her use of
“With Greg,” as if they were in the same room.
Asked for love letters—no pressure, let me emphasize—the two
obliged with thousands of words just from their August 1994
writings alone. Mostly the letters were from Sue whose feelings were
more conveniently preserved in digital form than were the letters
from Greg. He wasn’t holding back: He was the one who had
contacted me about their romance. What followed from Sue was
more affecting than anything I’d read in a novel, for it was real, and

I learned about it in the same way that Greg did, through a series of
pixels on a computer screen. Reading this one message would help
explain why she was willing to leave Kansas City; why she felt that,
regardless of a father with heart trouble, she had felt free to move
on; perhaps even why she was willing to share her life so openly
with me through this book, for a chronicle was an affirmation of
sorts.
New to me but old to Greg, the revelation did not come
immediately. Sue’s August letters started out mainly with the routine,
the glue of long-range relationships, the confirmation that she
wanted Greg to know her life and likes. There was talk of food (“I
love you more than I love munching on peanut butter and
crackers”), diets (“I splurged on Chinese and probably regained the
three pounds I lost”), art (at the Nelson museum she favored the
impressionists), friends’ babies (“Barbara went to the doctor this
morning to check and see how the baby was doing—she was about
ten weeks along, and she had a miscarriage”), school (Sue was
attending community college and could not resist sharing a few
unabashedly corny jokes about her anatomy course), places to go on
vacation (“Hey,” she said, in a discussion of Mount Rushmore, “do
you Aussies get weird and chisel the faces of dead leaders onto
mountainsides, or is that a distinctly American thing to do?”), and
jobs (“this working full time and college at night is starting to wear
me down a bit, but for the time being it’s what I want to do”).
Like almost any woman she planned. The word was that Greg
should wrap some paper around his fingers and snip it off at the
right place and send the results on to her so she’d know the size of
his ring. And should it be silver or gold? They discussed pajamas. “I
always thought it would be cool to share a pair of PJs with
someone,” Sue wrote. “I’d wear the tops, you’d get the bottom.
Okay, so I’m cheesy, but I guess it’s the American upbringing:).
Shrug.” In her mind Sue saw the “really cool chapel in Rapid City,
South Dakota, where my grandparents on dad’s side renewed their
vows for their fiftieth wedding anniversary.” “I wanna get married in
it,” she wrote Greg. “There’s a place where you can light a candle for
a loved one and say a prayer to keep them safe. Well, I lit a candle

for Barbara, and then I lit one for us. It felt weird to be in a church
for a good reason. Seems that all the last ones have been for
funerals.”
Another close friend had died some time back, and she reflected
on the connection between that and a period of heavy activity on
the bulletin board circuit. “When I logged on, I could just be some
faceless person—no one had to know that my best friend was in the
hospital room semicomatose because he had developed full-blown
AIDS. There were so many people in my life that just up and left
because Ralph* got sick; it was almost as if I had AIDS just by
association. So I got online and became everyone’s favorite
sweetheart.”
Then a signal fact emerged in the correspondence, something that
explained who Sue was, and why Sue felt like Sue, although I
believed that she and Greg would have wanted to be together even
if her circumstances had been different. “I had just found out,” she
told him, “that I had won a fight against a terminal illness while
Ralph was losing his. I don’t talk about the fact that I am a cancer
survivor very much, because I haven’t been in remission that long. It
will be two years in September.
“All I want to do is make it to the five-year mark and forget the
pain and the tears and the chemo and the treatments,” the letter
said. “I want to look forward and be able to see a future without
constant trips to the hospital, to days and nights when I can just be
healthy and happy. I have a tendency to block out when I was sick
because if I don’t think about it, I don’t remember it, and if I don’t
remember it, I don’t worry about it coming back. If you ask, I will
tell you everything.” Very early on in their friendship, Greg had
known that the cancer was cervical; any children would have to be
adopted. Sue ended the message by assuring him that she no longer
wanted “the foreign policy degree from Georgetown anymore, or the
chance to have the President asking my opinion on things.” Her goal
now was Greg, an affordable flat, and a roomful of kids to teach.
The rest of her letters went on to discuss such cosmic questions
as Sue’s love of long showers in the mornings, her tendency to roll
around a little in her sleep, and Greg’s hatred of his cataloguing

duties.[7.7] “I love love love love love you,” he wrote, and heated up
the wires some more while he and Sue dreamed of hugs at the
airport, unstoppable passion, and a wedding.
“Know,” he told her, “that there’s a goofy, tall, dark, Australian,
madly-in-love man here dreaming of you, and us, and the future.” I
was betting right now that they’d make it to that South Dakota
church.
Lee Chen: The
Lover as a Peripheral
He was a hacker, a true denizen of the Internet, and a poet at
times. A word in one poem told all: “peripheral.” It means a printer,
a modem, a scanner, or any other gadget that plugs into the main
computer, yet is not one of the very most important parts. And that’s
how some women on the Net saw him, the human equivalent of a
printer, someone on the peripheries of their minds. He was among
their friends but not their lovers. His own love went unreturned. So
he called his poem “Song of a Peripheral”; he posted it to
alt. romance, soc. couples, alt. support. loneliness, and
alt. support. shyness. It read, in part:
You feel you’re nothing special in her life.
You never get a sense that she wants you to be close to her.
You’re just a pleasant, polite friend around the periphery of her
world.
But you still care for her, because she is that special woman—
A sweetest heart who cares for the well-being of others.
A most sensuous soul who is full of life and passion.
And a beautiful intellect who brings realist precepts to balance
out those disillusions in the world.... It’s painful to feel you’re just a Peripheral, isn’t it?

“How could I not print part of ‘Song’ in this chapter,” I thought,
and wrote Lee Chen for permission. Back came a letter from the
Department of Computer Science at the University of Calgary in
Canada. People on the Internet love to end messages with
“signatures” telling how they see the cosmos, and Lee had picked a
quote that looked as gentle and logical as his poem. The speaker
was the President of the United States in the movie Dr. Strangelove
or How I Learned to Start Worrying and Love the Bomb. And the
words went, “You can’t fight in here, this is the War Room.”
Sometimes I thought that in the battle of the sexes, certain areas
of the Internet could be that war room. No man could claim to be a
superhunk or millionaire without risking a female retort in the vein
of, “Yeah, sure.” The Net was rich with put-downs worthy of an old
Tracy-Hepburn movie. Clearly the men had started this war, however.
“When a female shows up,” said the author of an explanatory file on
alt. sex. wanted, “clueless folks tend to e-mail ‘wanna fuck’ messages
no matter what she has said. This means many of them don’t post,
only listen.” Fights had also broken out between the gays and certain
heterosexuals, who came up with the witless fag jokes, and who, in
turn, had drawn equally stupid remarks about “breeders.” In this
sexual war, the biggest losers were SMHGs. That was Netspeak for
Straight Male Horny Geeks, who, as noted earlier, suffered from the
laws of supply and (lack of) demand.
Lee Chen was an SMHG in a nice way. His style had been to try in
alt. personals rather than one of the tackier areas. When Lee had
placed a recent ad, he had described himself as “a romantic
dreamer,” and he wanted “a single woman between the ages of
nineteen and thirty-three who is sincere, intelligent, attractive,” and
“passionate” as well. Lee was twenty-six and entitled to feel his age.
Moreover, based on his self-description, women would have no more
reason to run away from him than they did from Greg Smith in his
lonely days.
“I’m five feet eleven inches, 185 pounds, have dark brown eyes
and short black hair,” Lee said. “And I’m a healthy, disease-free
nonsmoker and considered attractive looking.” He told me he held a
master’s in computer science, was continuing his studies, and

obviously was destined to earn a comfortable living at the very least.
Lee enjoyed “going out to movies and romantic dinners, discussing
current events and politics, visiting museums and natural parks,
walking along the rivers, listening to various kinds of music, giving
and receiving pleasures with a sensuous partner.” So far, however,
Lee lacked a woman—he was new in town. Maybe a minor part of
his problem, at least among females off campus, was the kind of
place that Calgary was. He saw it as “a cowboy city, big in the oil
business, very similar to Dallas culturally, except for the cold winter
climate.” This particular SMHG might have felt more comfortable in a
more intellectually minded city such as Boston or San Francisco. But
he was no snob and still held out hope of meeting one of the locals
rather than confining the search to university people (“I’m sure there
are many wonderful women in this town”). Simultaneously he
decided to try the Net.
The first time out with a personal ad, Lee heard from a woman in,
yes, Australia—E-Mail Central. Dozens of love letters threatened to
melt down any fiber-optics on the Net; in fact, she sent Lee her
erotic poetry and encouraged him to reply with the same. Through it
all, he was high minded. “I believe in the mutual respect between
women and men,” he said, “but am also saddened by the gradual
decline of romantic chivalry in our society. I feel they don’t need to
be mutually exclusive.” His poet in Australia seemed to feel the
same. Within a month she promised to fly to Canada.
“My darkest knight, my love,” she called him. She was “burning
with a need to talk with you, to share with you my fears, my joys. I
ache to be able to brush a falling raindrop from your cheek and hold
your handsome face close to my heart. I miss you already though
we have not met.”
This woman could have been crafting bodice-rippers for Harlequin
Books. “I thrive on every word that falls from your sensuous lips,”
she wrote Lee. “I feel I am being too bold for a lady of my breeding,
but what I feel has gone from my control before I was aware of my
feelings.” More letters followed, more fire, more steam. And then,
out of nowhere: “This is the very last time I will write to you. You
have to leave me alone. Any future mail you send me will remain

unanswered. We do not know each other. Words across a net aren’t
a firm basis of a relationship and it takes time to form a friendship.
We have neither and I cannot currently give either to you. I have
strong personal commitments at the moment that leave me unable
to commit to anyone, especially a man in a romantic way. Please
understand. It may have been special and beautiful, but it has to be
over. One day I may be in a position to explain further, but currently
I cannot. I apologise once more and wish you well in your life.”
“Maybe,” Lee looked back, “it was just a game for her.” And, no
dummy, he had learned from such experiences. Nowadays Lee was
wary of anonymous addresses with low numbers that suggested
their owners had been cruising alt. personal for a long time.
He had also learned of the usefulness of friendship as a prelude to
love. “Of all those ladies who answered my original personal,” he
said, “only one is still corresponding as a friend.” Another female
friend was also in his life online, somebody he met in an unrelated
newsgroup. She typed out an popular opinion and he wrote in to
agree, and they found they shared interests. But neither saw
romance immediately ahead. Nor was that true of the other
friendships he had online. Although vague about them, he suggested
that he was still on the periphery.
Reached some months later, Lee told me he had gone on to
befriend “quite a few nice women around this campus.” In person
and on the Net, however, he had yet to meet just the right one for
those river walks, museum tours, and “giving and receiving
pleasure.”
“Well, sorry, David,” Lee said, “but I didn’t have a happy ending.
I‘m sure there are some people who actually find their true loves this
way. Although I didn’t find true love, I’ve found many sincere
friendships via the Net. So I’m glad that the Net has worked for me.”
I was, too, and I wished him all kinds of wonderful surprises ahead.
Chivalrous SMHGs like Lee Chen should be more than peripherals.

Net
Adultery
Places like New York or Tokyo abound with museums, art galleries,
movie houses, universities, and large pools of single people who
hope to meet the same. Something else, however, awaits those
looking for it—more opportunities for adultery than in small towns.
And it is the same with the Internet. It isn’t just that straying wives
and husbands can use those identity-stripping computers in Finland
to make swap shopping easier. More importantly, the Internet teems
with bright, funny, people who hate convention, including, in some
cases, marriage.
For a stretch, a support-style mailing list came across as a Peyton
Place in cyberspace. A man and a woman met there. He told her he
would be leaving his wife and children. She spent that weekend with
a third member of the list; after the original man publicly confessed,
she popped up out of the blue to give her side. If anyone doubted
that computers could bring people together in person, this was proof
positive in the worst way. Most members of the list were horrified.
They pleaded for Peyton Placers to go offline. Clearly the Internet
does not turn people into saints—it just makes it easier to do what
comes naturally, good or bad.
But some context, please. The same Net could bring together old-
fashioned romantics. As shown by the Smith-Olson pairing, the Net
could actually strengthen traditional values among those who so
inclined.
Besides, much of the illicit action on the Net was by the mutual
consent of husbands and wives. When I ventured into a seamy area
called alt. personals. poly, I saw an ad posted by a swinging couple
from Florida. “I am 6′3″ brown haired, considered attractive,” said
Hank*, the husband. “She is 5ʹ0″ busty, blonde, blue eyes, very
pretty. We’re not weird or disturbed or wanting to beat people,

hahaha. We are very sensual, passionate, and are good at ya know
the fun stuff.” Was this the ’Bahn that Bill and Al had in mind for us?
Not quite. But it wasn’t as if some pervert was cheating on his wife
and hiding behind an anonymous server while lusting for a nineteen-
year-old coed who was new to both life and the Net. Although I did
not condone Hank’s swinging, I actually felt a little sorry for him
after he wrote me a short but touching letter: He told how a woman
had stood him up and the Missus. Better luck next time, Hank.
Suppose, however, that a man and woman had been married for
fifteen years and had two children, he was a straight-arrow
programmer type, she was funny and sexy, he introduced her to the
Internet, and she got crushes on men whom she befriended over the
wire—a marriage just might fall apart because a stranger might
actually fly in from out of town wanting to get to know her in a
biblical way. Such was the case of Phil* and Jayne*. While I have
scrambled the details of the story, it is entirely true in spirit. They
lived in Cincinnati, and Bill worked as a programmer and an Internet
administrator for his employer. He had arranged for his wife to be
able to dial up the office computer from home and send and receive
e-mail. That, as we’ll learn in a moment, was a key fact.
In many ways Phil and Jayne were a contrast. He could “readily
repair my hurt emotions when it comes to betrayal, be it from
friends, or from my wife.” Phil held himself to the highest of
standards no matter how low-minded the rest of the cosmos was.
Jayne, on the other hand, was wild and loved to party and speak up.
“She can drink anyone under the table,” Phil said. “She has a loud
voice and a happy disposition. She can talk to anyone and make
them feel at ease. She is a joy to be with. A blonde with striking blue
eyes. She has the attitude of a redhead but we never fight. She
rarely sports a smile, but when she does, it is radiant. She has an
excellent body, but she keeps on thinking it is not quite desirable.
She has gone in for plastic surgery because of her low self-esteem.”
For some years in her life, Jayne suffered from another problem—
stodginess, of all things. Taxiing children around, nagging them to
do their schoolwork, playing the good mother, had made her too
conservative. Phil wanted the old sparks back. So he introduced her

to “an e-mail friend of mine who had been a catalyst for many
parties as well. I hoped this would spur her into action.” It did. She
began a love affair over the Net. “I often ran to the computer room
after getting home from work to find Jayne engrossed in some letter
writing. She would immediately cover the screen and ask me to
leave. I could see the discomfort in her face. This was one of my
clues to ask around and to check up on what might be happening. I
caught them in the act in a swank hotel.” For the sake of the
children, however, Phil forgave her and did not divorce. He even
revived his friendship with his e-mail friend.
A second man, however, cuckolded Phil a few years later, and like
the first, he was an alcoholic. “He would hound her,” Phil said, “and
send copious amounts of e-mail, call her from wherever he was
regardless of how distant. He had an attitude that ‘no one can tell
him what to do, even if it is an affair.’” So Phil, despite his forgiving
nature, did what many red-blooded men would have done in his
place as a local Internet administrator. He deleted their electronic
mail from the office system. “The second affair rekindled after the
lover’s wife left him,” Phil says. Lawyers successfully pried Jayne and
the man apart.
“She has ‘fallen’ into love with other people on the Net,” Phil said,
however, “and some have even taken the trouble to fly in to meet
her.” Fortunately the moon and the stars and the hormones weren’t
right. So where on the Net did Jayne hook up with these winners?
Alt. sex. wanted? No, Phil said—rec. humor. And he actually feared
rec. humor more than he did the plain, sex-oriented areas of the Net,
because it might pave the way for a relationship based on more than
carnal impulses.
I asked, “As a local Net administrator, do you think that people on
the Net play around more or less than does the general population?”
“About the same,” Phil said. “But there are a lot more insecure
personalities acting out an alternate personality on the net. This will
often lead, I think, to more misunderstandings. Someone can appear
to love you a lot, over e-mail, but cannot carry through in person.”
And then Phil came up with another fascinating insight, which could
also apply to some relationships on the Internet between single

people. He observed that certain Netfolks really didn’t care that
much about the men or women at the other end. Rather they used
electronic mail as a diary. “Jayne cherished the e-mail she got from
one of her lovers,” Phil said, “but in person he is a lying, cheating,
and abusive drunk with a far more shallow agenda.”
Phil and Jayne were doing what they could to repair the damage.
The two had undergone marriage counseling. “Stop trying to think
so much,” Phil was told. “This makes you appear to be walking on
eggshells, making it harder for Jayne to be honest with you.” I
hoped the counseling would work. As if her infidelity weren’t
enough, she now cried because she might have contracted the virus
that causes AIDS. “One of her lovers has slept around a lot and shot
up drugs,” Phil said. “He hasn’t seen a doctor in ages because of his
alcoholic tendencies, and on one occasion he has said he could have
the HIV virus. I assured Jayne... we will handle any result from the
test one day at a time.” The same thought might apply to his life
with Jayne. One day at a time. In the future, I hoped, she won’t be
so secretive about the dots on her computer screen.
Greg and Sue, an
Update
I promised to update you on Greg and Sue. In late May 1995 Greg
told me they were still moving ahead, except that they’d decided it
would be much easier for her if they lived in the States. He would
arrive at the Kansas City airport on Wednesday, July 12, at 11:11 P. M.
on American Airlines. “My parents know,” he said. “On the surface
they’re bitchy about it—well, Mum is—but underneath they’re cool
with it. Especially my dad. He wants to come too.” The older Smith
had taken his family to Colorado years earlier during a teacher-
exchange program.
“Work?” Greg went on. “Heck, I can do a lot of things. My
preference would be systems administrator or network maintenance

or even Internet guru-trainer.”
Jokes about Adelaide’s sleepiness notwithstanding, Greg would
miss life down under. He cherished “the laid-back nature of Australia.
I spend a lot of time talking to people, and in 99 of 100 cases, the
shopkeeper will take time out to have a chat about something going
on in the world. People are so open and friendly, gosh darnit. I mean
friendly, not lazy.” He would hate to give up, too, the summer days
at the sea, the music festivals of Adelaide, and the programs of the
Australian Broadcasting Commission (“it’s government funded and
turns up some really cool and alternative stuff”). He would also miss
Australian Rules Football. “Mostly that’s an art form,” Greg said.
“Unlike NFL, every player has to be able to do every other player’s
job. There’s no offense or defense, and it’s such a quick game that
offense can turn into defense in the blink of an eye.”
E-mailing me on a rainy, thundery day—from “America’s Heartland
soon to be changed to America’s Flood Plain”—Sue wrote: “Thoughts
and hopes? Well, I think the one thing I’ve had to struggle with
lately is facing up to the fear that we won’t get along. I know there’s
a chance. I’ve pretty much come to grips with it, so I think that’s a
good sign. I think we’ll work it out. I hope we will, but that’s yet to
be foretold—I’m just looking forward to finally meeting my best
friend.
“Where we’ll live is a little uncertain. I’m still making the rounds of
apartment complexes, trying to pick one that I like, that I think he’ll
like, and that is central to work and school.
“Telling people about Greg and me is a little tricky. Most of the
people I work with understand the basic concept of the Internet, but
don’t really understand the idea of love at first talk session. I’ve
pretty much just told people I met Greg through friends. It just
makes things a lot easier, seeing as how I don’t have to explain
things over and over again. Maybe it’s a cop-out, but everyone
knows how committed I am to Greg regardless of how we met, and
that’s the important thing.
“My father remains in the dark,” she said. “My mom and I had a
big discussion about things and she felt that was the best way to
handle things with him. I’m just taking things one step at a time and

dealing with them as they come. I don’t want to throw it all in his
face. He’s still my daddy and has the best interest of his baby girl at
heart.” Earlier I’d told Sue that the hassles would vanish when she
met Greg, and she had agreed. “’Cept maybe the fact Greg will be
the tallest one at family reunions *grin*. We’ll all be arguing over
whose side of the volleyball net he’s on. Mine of course.:-) *grin*.”
Sue brought me up to date on work and school. Recently she’d
switched jobs and was now a file clerk for an appliance company
where the pay was higher and the boss friendlier. “I can pretty much
study during the slow periods, which helps a great deal, *brandishes
her grade card*. Got it in the mail today—all A’s. I’m framing this
sucker—I actually pulled an A in algebra!”
Her net. lover was getting a cc of the note to me. “Oh, Greg,” she
couldn’t resist adding, “I did some rearranging for you today. I think
you might be able to have a drawer or two in the dresser *grin* just
kidding. I cleaned my room today and vacated one-half of my
drawer space, a major accomplishment almost tantamount to the A
in algebra. Just don’t look in the closet.”
Redirecting the note back to me, Sue said: “I’ve always been up
front with Greg about who I am and how I look and how I act and
all that stuff. There’s going to be a lot of rough edges we’ll need to
smooth out, but I’d say we’ve got a strong foundation to build on.”
Concluding, Sue said she had undergone a round of antibiotic-
hormonal treatments for an ulcer and gained weight. “The bad news
is the weight gain that went along with it. Least now I have the bust
to fill out my bathing suit.”
A few days later I heard from Greg. Uh-oh. “To put it bluntly,” he
wrote, “I am not a happy camper.” I hoped I hadn’t offended him.
He and Sue had given so much of themselves by sharing their letters
with me. As I read on, I found out the true reason for his dismay. It
wasn’t an ever-curious writer, or parents, or friends, or professional
colleagues: Greg had graduated from school and was doing fine with
temporary consulting work. “Visa—problem, big problem. My visitor’s
visa has been denied on the grounds that I have insufficient reason
to return to Australia. The upshot of this is that our wedding and my
travel plans have been severely disrupted, delaying us by anything

upwards of about two months—gawd, I hate the sound of that. I
talked to Sue on the phone last night-her morning, and we’re
confident we can make it through this.”
In character Greg was using the Net, and specifically the
newsgroup alt. visa. us, to help him cope with the visa’crats.
“It makes no sense to me that the U. S. government won’t let in
someone with a college degree that’s in demand in this country,” Sue
wrote, “and who speaks English with such a sexy accent.”
She had one last update later in June: “There’s one thing you have
to change in your chapter, and it’s just one line. I went to the
oncologist and he said I’d had enough tissue regeneration that was
healthy to give me some hope of being able to have kids. So I guess
I just might get to explore the world of labor pains and stretch
marks after all. Ugh.
“And I know this sounds cheezy, but would you mind altering
names?”
I was happy to oblige.
“The press here in Kansas City,” Sue said, “has an absolute field
day with stuff like this. A guy got a mail-order bride from Russia a
year or so ago, and they had a five-part segment on his life story in
the paper and on the news. I’d just rather not be looked at as
someone who had to go to a whole other country to find a date.
Which is how my father puts it *sigh*.”
Oh, she had finally told. I wished I could see her father’s face
when Greg actually materialized in K. C. In the most direct way Fred
Olson* might understand how fortuitously the Net had enlarged his
daughter’s range of choices. What counted wasn’t her finding a man,
but the best man for her—whether he was next-door or an ocean
away.
So that was how matters stood with Sue and Greg as the presses
were about to turn. I pondered the visa problem. Damn the feds.
Already the ayatollahs of the Senate had been trying to turn the
Internet into Mr. Roger’s Neighborhood, while the crew in the White
House was crusading to make the Net more snoop-friendly. Now

Washington was getting in the way of both a romance and a more
definitive ending to my love chapter.
As I typed those words I was listening to a RealAudio replay of
Senator James Exon pushing his censorship bill on the Senate floor—
an outrage that could harm not only net. sex but net. love, given the
major danger of abusive enforcement. I loathed the man’s voice.
The bullying selfrighteousness struck me most of all. Exon’s tone
was too close to that of the late Senator Joseph McCarthy, the anti -
communist zealot from Wisconsin. In a very narrow way I regretted
that the Cold War was over. Now the bigots and bullies could focus
on domestic troublemakers. Listening to the digitized Exon, I heard
him say that a Nebraskan football coach had cheered him on. I
reflected. Perhaps the senator and the coach could do a RealAudio
broadcast from the locker rooms and show that in their territory
even the after-game talk was G-rated.
My thoughts drifted. RealAudio reminded me of another recent
wrinkle, The Internet Phone, which let Netfolks talk all over the
world for free if they paid flat rates for Net service. What a joy this
might be for people like Greg and Sue in the days before they
rushed into each other’s arms at the airport.
There were a few catches. You needed a deluxe Net connection,
alas, which Sue lacked.
So she and Greg would still have to reach out and touch type to
each other.
That wasn’t so bad, actually. They were saving their e-mail, and
someday the files would remind them of all the promise, all the
anticipation, that the Net had held out for them in the form of each
other.
Although I tinkered with The Internet Phone, I preferred electronic
mail, just as I’d normally favored international Morse code over voice
during my amateur radio days. Now that art might be lost. Code
didn’t matter as much on the airwaves as before. The U. S. Coast
Guard was phasing it out. Any future SOS would apparently be in
bits and bytes rather than in dots and dashes, assuming the initials
remained at all. What would also perish—writing on screens,
eventually? Just what would happen to typed words on the Net?

Whether seriously or just as a discussion provoker, a Seattle
columnist had imagined the following: “It’s the year 2020; your
daughter Emily is nine years old and she can’t read or write. Is this
your worst nightmare about our schools come true? Nope, Emily just
doesn’t need to read or write anymore. ” That, of course, was exactly
the kind of nightmare I’d had on my mind in proposing TeleRead. We
needed graphics, not just words; but surely we could do better than
the Emily scenario.
I’d asked Avodah Offit for comments on net. love rather than on
the effects of the technology in general, but she couldn’t help
warning about the almost inevitable transition of the Net to sounds
and images for all.
Delighted by the renaissance of writing on networks, she’d e -
mailed me: “I think two-way TV will bring us down to earth. It will
be a loss rather than a gain to those of us who enjoy using our
imaginations and our writing skills. Right now we all have an
opportunity to use the literacy that humans have spent thousands of
years developing. ”
That was how I felt, too, whether the topic on the Net was
romance or gerbil care. An old pop lyric came to mind: “These are
the good old days. ” I wondered about the Snubbites and how they
would have felt about Greg and Sue and the many others the Net
had brought together; about the leather-jacketed kids up in Nova
Scotia who, for the first time in their lives, were looking forward to
writing, however rudimentary the elite Snubbites might have
considered the children’s prose; about all the love letters that might
go unwritten if TV-centric politicians let Emily and friends live out
their lives as illiterates without electronic books or keyboards or
equivalents.
Some things were forever worth our being reactionaries in an
enlightened way. Literacy was one of them. We mustn’t ever let the
romance and civility of the written word die on the Internet.
Once again I recalled some e-mail Sue had sent, in which she had
not meant to be profound but was. Sue the cancer survivor had
reminded us of the need to enjoy both Life and Net, and I wanted
similar thoughts to grace the screens of many lovers, in many

countries, and for many years. “*hugs greg* hold your horses
sweetie,” she had written, “I’m typing as fast as I can....”

Notes
Chapter 1—The Terrain
1.1. The three Net-hostile quotes are from Joshua Quittner’s “Back
to the real world: New books from the front lines of the information
revolution urge cyberspace cadets to get a life,” Time, April 17, 1995,
page 56.
1.2. Luddites, of course, were the loom smashers of the
nineteenth century who protested automation.
1.3. Goldberg is author of the book Questions and Answers about
Depression (Charles Press, 1993), but the book is clearly not his
main reason for being on Walkers—mentions of Questions have been
well within limits. Sheer altruism is clearly his true motive.
1.4. Reid Kanaley, “Computers to the rescue: Internet becoming a
worldwide safety net,” Philadelphia Inquirer, January 17, 1995, page
1.
1.5. Kanaley.
1.6. John Schwartz, “On the information net, creativity is its own
reward,” Washington Post, April 10, 1995, page 23 of the
“Washington Business” section. Schwartz is a Post reporter and
columnist.
1.7. Quittner.

1.8. Stoll himself noted the Maine-Texas allusion.
1.9. Irwin Lebow, Information Highway&Byways: From the
Telegraph to the 21st Century (Piscataway, New York: IEEE Press:
1995), page 17. A good book. Highly recommended. It even comes
with the Walden allusion, although from a rather different
perspective from that of Stoll.
1.10. Thanks to my friend Andy Oram for the buffalo analogy.
1.11. With hypertext links, readers could click on mentions of the
Star Tribune and immediately go from my area of the World Wide
Web to the one where the newspaper had posted the West article. I
didn’t reproduce the material; I just pointed my readers in its
direction.
Chapter 2—Business on the Net:
From White Rabbit Toys to “Intel Inside”
2.1. The physical description is based on photographs in local
newspapers.
2.2. Advertising Age, January 9, 1995, page 22 of the “Interactive
Media&Marketing” section.
2.3. Peter Lewis, “Prodigy is leading its peers onto the World Wide
Web,” New York Times, January 18, 1995, page D1.
2.4. Interactive Publishing Alert is available for $195 for 12
monthly issues via e-mail, and $245 by regular mail. Contact
71333.1473@compuserve. com or rosalind@harrison. win. net for
more information, or write Rosalind Resnick at 1124 Harrison St.,
Hollywood, FL 33019.
2.5. The Cook Report, written for the Net savvy and dealing
heavily with local and state Net issues, costs $85 for individuals and
$350-$650 for corporations. Cook’s e-mail address is

cook@cookreport. com; his physical address, 431 Greenway Avenue,
Ewing, NJ 08618.
2.6. Rates for new customers increased after the Times article on
Larry Grant appeared in mid-1994.
2.7. Mark Lyon, “Firm gives air freight a lift on Internet,” Air
Commerce Special supplement, page 8, distributed with the Journal
of Commerce, December 19, 1994.
2.8. Of course, on occasion, electronic mail can be delayed for
several hours and maybe even longer. So Telnet or the World Wide
Web would probably be better in situations where couriers are on
tight schedules.
Chapter 3—EntertaiNet: A Few Musings on Net. Rock,
Leonardo da Vinci and Bill Gates, Bianca’s Smut Shack,
and David Letterman in Cyberspace
3.1. ISDN means Integrated Services Digital Network, which
allows transmissions faster than the 14.4 Kbps and 28.8 Kbps rates
so common today.
3.2. Barry Walters, “The Internet is a punk rocker now,” San
Francisco Examiner, February 27, 1974, page D3 (Style section).
3.3. Laurel Taylor, “The speed of sound,” Good Times, August 18,
1994.
Chapter 4—Pulped Wood versus Electrons:
Can the Print World Learn to Love the Net?
4.1. A. C.’s work is on the Net, but in the strictest sense he himself
isn’t. His daughter at a paper in Florida can enjoy his columns online
but can’t even swap e-mail with him. Perhaps she’ll eventually
conquer his technophobia. A. C., I’m rooting for you.

4.2. Frank Daniels III, “One newspaper’s journey on the Internet,”
T Leaves: A Newsletter for NAA Members, October 1994. NAA is the
Newspaper Association of America.
4.3. David Streitfeld, “Book report,” Washington Post, September
25, 1994, page 19 of Book World section.
4.4. Lewis and many other journalists here do not necessarily
serve as official spokespeople for their publications.
4.5. Teresea Martin, “Like a newspaper, but better: Tablets will
succeed where others have failed,” Digital Media: A Seybold Report,
September 13, 1994.
4.6. Jonathan Seybold, “How the rise of electronic media is
affecting paper prices,” Digital Media Perspective, March 27, 1995.
4.7. To Baker’s credit, he seems to have learned about the new
media since writing the article. Commendably he came out for an
online royalty-collection approach that would be less onerous to
readers than the approach favored by the Clinton Administration.
4.8. As usual, for aesthetic reasons, I’m using italics to show
emphasis in place of the original capitalization.
4.9. Not to be confused with the former speech writer for Ronald
Reagan.
4.10. I’m not beating up on the late professor, one of the best
teachers I ever had. In his place, I’d have given the same advice.
The limitations of 1960s technology made it difficult to think
otherwise.
4.11. E-mail from Bruce Siceloff.
4.12. Katherine Fulton, “Heirs to newspaper make unlikely
pioneers. So why is Frank Daniels III out on the frontier?”, Poynter

Special Report: Converging Technologies, 1994, pages 5-7.
4.13. Ibid.
4.14. Daniels, in T Leaves.
4.15. The speculation about Time’s role in the cable trade is my
own. Jim Kinsella, one of the organizers of Pathfinder, told me that
he liked this approach but was not necessarily speaking for the
company.
4.16. In Raleigh, a locally oriented arm of Time Warner might
enjoy a big advantage over the N&O someday if the newspaper
lacked access to cable for Internet purposes. Cable will probably be
much better than phone connections, the kind the N&O uses. The
best cure, of course, would be laws that (1) assured the N&O a
place on local cable and (2) also let the phone companies there go
into the cable business. Then the N&O could choose between Time
Warner and its phone company allies of the present. Perhaps such
laws will be on the books by the time you’re reading this. Meanwhile,
I’ll hardly blame the people at Time Warner for unofficially talking up
cable for the Internet; as noted before, I’d do the same, given the
technical benefits.
4.17. Conspiracy theorists may take note that another arm of the
Newhouse interests, Ballantine Books, is distributing NetWorld! for
Prima Publishing.
4.18. Laurie Flynn, “Getting on-line—the Microsoft way,” New York
Times, November 20, 1994, page F10.
4.19. The Stahlman and Smith quotes are from “Time Inc. raises
its multimedia profile with an Internet test,” by Deirdre Carmody,
New York Times, October 24, 1994, page D10.
4.20. Laura Fillmore, “Online publishing: Threat or menace,”
speech to the Online Publishing Conference, Graphic

Communications Association, March 1993.
4.21. Ibid.
4.22. Ibid.
4.23. Fillmore, “Slaves of a new machine: Exploring the for-
free/for-pay conundrum,” Fifth Conference on Organizational
Computing, Coordination, and Collaboration: “Making Money on the
Internet,” Austin, Texas, May 10, 1994.
4.24. Ibid.
4.25. Vannevar Bush, “As we may think,” The Atlantic Monthly,
July 1945.
4.26. Interview with Fillmore.
4.27. Fillmore, “Slaves.”
4.28. Ibid.
4.29. Ibid.
4.30. Ibid.
4.31. Rory J. O’Connor, “News firms plan on-line network,” San
Jose Mercury News, April 20,1995, page 1F.
4.32. Reuter Information Service, “Newspaper executives see
online services as prime competitor,” carried by The NandO Times,
June 9, 1995.
4.33. David Streitfeld, “Cyberstrokes: For authors, e-mail offers
some novel reader feedback,” Washington Post, June 9,1995, page
B1.
Chapter 5—Wired Knowledge:

When They Let a Murderer Loose on the Internet
5.1. Ronnie Crocker, “Executed killer lives as computer image,”
Houston Chronicle, December 18, 1994, page A1.
5.2. To be technical, these weren’t true physical slices, just images
taken of the remaining surface as researchers ground down
Jernigan.
5.3. From an essay that Chris Gazunis wrote in a 1994 contest
sponsored by the National Center for Education Statistics, the NASA
K-12 Internet Project, and the National Science Foundation.
5.4. Randy Hammer was another contestant in the competition
that Chris Gazunis entered.
5.5. Peter West, “Wired for the future,” Education Week, January
11, 1995. The senior analyst quoted was Kathleen Fulton.
5.6. The University of Colorado got a great package deal. While I
couldn’t rate Helen according to her medical knowledge, she
appeared to know her computer imaging cold.
5.7. Not to confuse detachment with callousness. In Pelster’s place
—working with the cadaver day after day, not just writing about him
—I’d have coped the same way.
5.8. The Associated Press quoted Oxford and Nelson.
Chapter 6—Governments and the Net:
Making Sure Orwell Was Wrong
6.1. Encryption is the scrambling of messages into codes.
6.2. Simson Garfinkel, Wired, March 1995, page 44.
6.3. To simplify a bit, cryptography is the study, or the technique,
of making secret messages.

6.4. Peter Huber, Orwell’s Revenge: The 1984 Palimpsest (New
York: The Free Press, 1994).
6.5. Sandy Sandford, “The intelligent island?” Wired,
September/October 1993.
6.6. Rosalind Resnick, “Cyberbiz” column of July 3, 1995,
published in the Miami Herald, on the Knight-Ridder wire and her
Web site, http://www. netcreations. com. One of the best sites on the
whole Net. Drop by!
6.7. Exon has announced plans not to run again—his term ends in
1997. But who knows what can happen in the meantime?
6.8. My favorite observation on the passion for censorship comes
from Phil Kirby, a former editorial writer for the Los Angeles Times,
by way of Nat Hentoff, in the book Free Speech for Me, But Not for
Thee. “Censorship,” Kirby said, “is the strongest drive in human
nature; sex is a weak second.” Thanks to Rob Chatelle of the
National Writers Union for bringing this gem to my attention.
6.9. The example of messages violating local standards comes
from a syndicated column by Lawrence Magid that appeared in the
Washington Post on March 13, 1995.
6.10. Buckley and George Will are the most famous conservative
journalists in the United States. Among other accomplishments,
Buckley is founder of the National Review. His comments appeared
in an “On the Right” column released through the United Press
Syndicate on February 24, 1995.
6.11. Perhaps the idea will have been changed by now to allow
more freedom to librarians and the public.
6.12. David Buerger, “Our lives are quickly becoming an open
book,” Communications Week, May 9, 1994, page 52.

6.13. Simson Garfinkel, PGP: Pretty Good Privacy (Sebastopol,
California: O’Reilly&Associates, 1995), page 88.
6.14. Ibid.
6.15. Ibid.
6.16. William M. Bulkeley, “Cipher probe: Popularity overseas of
encryption code has the U. S. worried; Grand jury ponders if creator
‘exported the program through the Internet’; ‘Genie is out of the
bottle,’” The Wall Street Journal, April 28, 1994, page A1.
6.17. “Tidbits on the PGP/Zimmermann case—Protecting
Americans’ privacy,” an item that Jim Warren released in the March
6, 1995, issue of his online newsletter, Government Access.
6.18. Steven Levy, “Crypto rebel,” Wired, February 1993.
6.19. Ibid.
6.20. Garfinkel, PGP, page 112.
6.21. Ibid.
6.22. Ibid.
6.23. As of this writing, it looked as if Warren wouldn’t testify—
perhaps because his remarks would have been so helpful to
Zimmermann’s side.
6.24. To its credit, the White House at least called attention to the
First Amendment nightmares of the Exon “decency” bill. Given how
bad the bill was, however, that was a little like denouncing slavery.
6.25. If the case is still on, contact Hugh Miller at hmiller@luc. edu
for information on making donations.

6.26. “Another chop at the Clipper chip,” Business Week, February
13, 1995.
6.27. “I oppose the Clipper Chip and all forms of key escrow
because it’s impossible to use bad legislation as a substitute for bad
engineering,” Bob Steele told me. Yes, he’s the same CIA alum as in
chapter 4, the one with whom I agreed in a friendly way to disagree.
Hi, Bob—you’re right on about Clipper!
6.28. Peter Lewis, “Attention shoppers: Internet is open,” the New
York Times, August 12, 1994, page D1.
6.29. Bulkeley.
6.30. Ibid.
6.31. Ibid.
6.32. Privacy International is an international human rights
organization founded in 1987 to oppose privacy invasions worldwide.
It led the campaign to fight a national card proposal in Australia that
ended up causing Parliament to dissolve in 1987.
6.33. Ottawa Citizen, January 31, 1994, as reproduced by David
Banisar in his “Bug Off!” paper for Privacy International.
6.34. Bulkeley.
6.35. Elizabeth Corcoran, “Bit by bit, an online collection of the
Library of Congress to digitize artifacts,” the Washington Post,
October 10, 1994, page A1.
6.36. Junda Woo, “Big copyright curbs sought by industry,” the
Wall Street Journal, December 27, 1994, page B5.
6.37. Teresa Riordan, “Profile: Even in a ‘Big Tent,’ Little Insults,
Little Compromises,” the New York Times, May 29, 1994. The Times

is the source of information on Lehman’s heroes. To answer the
obvious question—yes, I asked Lehman for comment on a number of
topics ranging from campaign donations to his use (or possibly
nonuse) of the Internet. No reply came. I also asked him about his
controversial $10,000 gift to a local politician, the one described in
this chapter and in chapter note 41.
6.38. Saundra Torry, “Many of Clinton’s chosen earned big bucks in
private practice,” the Washington Post, October 18, 1993, page F7.
6.39. Found at http://www. uspto. gov/combio. html.
6.40. Riordan.
6.41. Pamela McClintock, “D. C. council candidate returns
questioned $10,000 loan,” the Washington Times, February 19,
1991, page B4. In a “Notebook on Politics” column on February 21,
Rene Sanchez of the Washington Post described the loan as
“apparently in violation of D. C. campaign finance law, which sets a
$400 ceiling on individual campaign donations.”
6.42. Riordan is the source of the “first” information.
6.43. Riordan.
6.44. Pamela Samuelson, “Legally speaking: The NII intellectual
property report,” Communications of the ACM, December 1994. On
the Web at http://gnn. interpath. net/gnn/meta/imedia/features/
copyright/samuelson. html.
6.45. The Manchurian Candidate was the film in which the
Communists captured a GI, brainwashed him, and groomed their
man to be president of the United States.
6.46. Marcia Berss, “West will always be three,” Forbes, November
21, 1994, page 47.

6.47. Ibid.
6.48. Ibid.
6.49. Ibid.
6.50. Sharon Schmickle and Tom Hamburger, “West Publishing and
the courts: U. S. justices took trips from West Publishing,”
Minneapolis Star Tribune, March 5, 1995. In of July, 1995, at least,
the lead article showed up on the Web at
http://www. startribune. com/westpub/west. htm. The home page for
the Star Tribune is http://www. startribune. com/.]
6.51. I can only speculate since, like Lehman, Opperman refused
to answer my written queries about donations and other matters.
6.52. Bill Salisbury, “Minnesota ‘bit players’ enjoy the show;
Democratic colleagues happy with their role at convention,” the St.
Paul Pioneer Press, July 14, 1994, Page 1A.
6.53. West’s 6,000-word letter of February 22, 1995, was available
on the World Wide Web at the following address in July 1995:
http://www. startribune. com/westpub/perspectives/response. htm.
6.54. Jack B. Coffman and Thomas J. Collins, “Bankrolling the
legislature part 6: Who has the clout,” the St. Paul Pioneer Press,
April 17, 1992, Page 1A.
6.55. Margaret Engle, “Virtual money trail: The Center for
Responsive Politics on the Internet,” Capital Eye, June 15, 1995,
Page 2.
6.56. Martin Schram, Speaking Freely: Former Members of
Congress Talk about Money and Politics (Washington, D. C: Center for
Responsive Politics, 1995), page 85.
Chapter 7—The Electronic Matchmaker

7. 1. The Goodin quotes appear in the paper “The Net and
Netizens: The impact the Net has on people’s lives, ” by Michael
Hauben ( hauben @ columbia. edu ).
7. 2. The America Online example is from a personal interview, the
CompuServe one from online messages, and the Prodigy example
from People magazine.
7. 3. Although anonymous servers protect privacy in most cases,
this could be happening only up to a certain point. Many on the Net
take it for granted that national security agencies in the United
States can monitor traffic to and from the servers and determine the
identities of the senders.
7. 4. I won’t even bother here with the term “Cyberpunk, ” which
nowadays can mean anyone from a rebellious hacker to a
technophobic teenager who is trying to make a fashion statement.
7. 5. Sue tells me her hair is shorter these days, “a little past my
chin now. ” I doubt the change will imperil Greg’s ardor.
7. 6. A program for sending and receiving electronic mail over a
network.
7. 7. I look forward to an era of electronic books where librarians
can function more as book reviewers and information hunters, and
less as clerks.

Index
A
Ackerman, Michael, 103, 181, 188, 190, 192
ACT UP, 255
Adleman, Len, 226-227
Adultery on Internet, 316-323
Agnew, Spiro, 286
AIDS
HIV Positive Dating Services, 293
PGP and activists, 255
Air freight business, 68
Alicia Patterson Foundation, 235
American Memory Project, 126
Americans Communicating Electronically, 263
American Society for Information Science, 267
America Online, 31, 32, 123, 128
Elmer-DeWitt’s message on, 148
Time magazine on, 148-149
WAIS Inc., 169
Amnesty International, 211-212
Andreessen, Marc, 44

Anonymous servers, 221
gamesplayers using, 299
Antitrust actions, 168-169
Apple Computer
Internet gadgets, 31
Scully, John on NII Advisory Council, 277
Art on Internet, 83-84
Aryan Nation, 242
Asahara, Shoko, 261
ASCII e-books, 163
Ash, Danielle, 83
At-risk students, 198-202
AT&T, 54
encryption chip, 240
Attention deficit disorder, 161
Austin Code Works, 232
Australia, 293-294
B
Baker, Nicholson, 112-113, 170
Baker, Stewart A., 241-242, 246-247
Ball, Patrick, 259
Banisar, David, 257
Barcroft School page, 17
Barlow, John Perry, 240-241
Barnhart, Aaron, 88-89
Barry, Dave, 123

Being Digital (Negroponte), 114
Berners-Lee, Tim, 155
Besser, Jim, 19, 122
Bianca’s Smut Shack, 63, 84-85, 220
Biden, Joseph, 228-229
Bidzos, Jim, 227, 228, 230, 232, 249-250
Big Sky Telegraph, 176
Bitnet, 2
Bix, 2
Black Entertainment Television, 277
Bless This Food: Amazing Grace in Praise of Food (Butash), 159
BMP files, 214
Bookport, 170-171
Book publishers, 110
Books online, 151-165
Bookstore, online, 121
Bracey, Bonnie, 284
Branch Mall, 50
customers of, 52
Brandy’s Babes, 29-30, 299
Brennan, William, 279
Brookman, Scott, 101-103
Brown, Ron, 272
Buckley, William F., Jr., 222-223, 247
“Bug Off” (Banisar), 257
Bush, George, 231

Bush, Vannevar, 155
Businesses
Federal Express, 34-35
hazards for, 76-79
Intel, 73-76
MCI, 34
and Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 255-256
3-D style, 42-43
White Rabbit Toys, 27-29, 35-48
Butash, Adrian, 159
Butler, Robert, 181, 191, 192
Butzer, Tim, 185
C
Cable modems, 143
Cable News Network, 123
Canada
government intervention, 220-221
Park View Education Centre, 195-207
Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, 87
Canter, Laurence A., 23-24, 54, 116
Caras, Sylvia, 12
Carl-Mitchell, Smoot, 296
Carnegie, Andrew, 222
Carvin, Andy, 176
Case, Steve, 215
CAT images, 186, 188
CBS, 87-88
on NII Advisory Council, 277, 278

CD-ROM, Visible Human Project and, 188, 190
Censorship, 215-216
Center for Responsive Politics, 279
Cerf, Vint, 55
political contributions by, 280
Chen, Lee, 311-315
Children. See also Education,
molestation on Internet, 214
NandOLand for, 130
Christie’s Internet MatchMaker, 293
Christopher, Susan O’Hara, 17
Civic League page, 17
ClariNet, 122-123
ClarkNet, 112
Clinger, William, 287
Clinton, Bill, 20, 211, 231, 279
Clipper chip, 78, 116, 147-148, 234-242
Green Paper compared, 275
key escrow technique, 238
PGP software and, 225
terrorism and, 260-261
Collins, Joe, 254-255
CommerceNet, 72
Compression software, 94
CompuServe, 2, 31, 123
Gore, Al on, 263
Limbaugh, Rush and, 247, 295, 303
“Umney’s Last Case” to, 158

Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, 229, 240-241
Condom stores, 30
Cook, Gordon, 49
Cooke, John F., 279
The Cook Report on Internet, 49
Copyrights, 118-119
digital libraries and, 264
Lehman, Bruce and, 268-272
United Kingdom regulations, 223-224
victories for, 288-289
Corning Glass, 280
Crak Software, 255
Crichton, Michael, 123
Crimenet, 18
Cronin, Mary, 32, 34
Crystal City, Virginia, 268-269
The Cuckoo’s Egg (Stoll), 6
Cyberia cafe, 25
Cyberia (legally oriented mailing list), 243
Cyberpunks, 230-232
Cyberspace Development Company, 31-32
CyberWire Dispatch (Meeks), 9
Cygnus Group, 39-40
D
Daniels, Frank, III, 106, 124, 125-126, 126-128, 130, 131-142, 165-
167

Daniels, Josephus, 125-126, 166
Dateline NBC, 117
Dating services, 292-293
Dean, David, 192
Dearth, Jeffrey, 144-145
Delphi, 2, 123
Depeche Mode, 91
Depression, 4-5
Dern, Daniel, 33
Der Spiegel, 109
The Diane Rehme Show, 6-7
Diffie, Whitfield, 233-234
DigiCash, 78
Digital Equipment Corporation, 79
Digital Publishing Association, 289
Doing Business on the Internet ( Cronin ), 32
Dole, Bob, 216
Doran, Jeff, 197-207
Doubleday, 112
Dubois, Phil, 248
Dunleavy, Houston, 294
Du Toit, Michael, 181
E
Echo, 6
EcoGopher, 40

EcoNet, 40
Education, 172-207
Park View Education Centre, 195-207
writing skills on Internet, 198-202
800 numbers for business, 48
Electric classifieds, 292
Electronic cafes, 25
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 209, 218
Electronic Frontier metaphor, 33-34
Electronic libraries. See Libraries
Electronic Newsstand, 144-145
Elmer-DeWitt, Philip, 147-148, 218
Elmer Gantry ( Lewis ), 216
E-mail, 14, 59-60, 154
from Australia, 293-294
confidentiality of, 252-253
with NandOLand, 130
Pretty Good Privacy ( PGP ) for, 208-211
religious confessions via, 224-225
reporters interviewing with, 119
Encryption software, 209-211, 224
See also Clipper chip; Pretty Good Privacy ( PGP )
National Security Agency and, 233-234
subpoenas of makers, 232
Engel, Margaret “Peggy, ” 235-236
Engst, Adam, 144
Entertainment Weekly, 109, 146
Envirolink Network, 40

e World, 2
Exon, J. James, 214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 220, 323
F
FBI, 228-229
Usenet postings, collection of, 258
Federal Election Commission, 281
Federal Express, 34-35, 67-73
Feinstein, Dianne, 9, 281
Few, Sue, 100-101
Fidler, Roger, 151
FidoNet, 213-214
File Transfer Protocol ( FTP ), 14
Fillmore, Laura, 121, 151-165, 163
Firewalls, 78
Flaming, 118
Foley, Tom, 282-283
Fong, Kendrick, 258
Forms, 267
France, encryption rules in, 238-239
Freedom of Information Act, 222, 286
Freeh, Louis, 219
Freelancing, 153
Fry, David, 47, 54
Fry Multimedia, 54
FTP ( File Transfer Protocol ), 97

The Future Does Not Compute ( Talbott ), 3
G
Gamesplayers, 298-299
Garfinkel, Simson, 227, 232
Gatekeepers, 122
Gates, Bill, 84
Gazunis, Chris, 177
General Electric
hackers and, 78
Web area of, 35
General Services Administration, 286-287
GEnie, 2, 123
GenNet, 99
German encryption regulations, 239
Gilder, George, 17, 247-248
Gilmore, John, 215
Gingrich, Newt, 219, 247, 287
Glaxo Inc., 181, 190
Global markets, 120
Global Net Navigator, 144
Goen, Kelly, 229
Goldberg, Ivan, 5
Goodin, Laura, 294
Gopher, 14
for business, 41
Gordon, Mike, 129

Gore, Al, 156, 263, 269, 272
Gore, Tipper, 92
Gores, Luciana, 35-36, 47
Government. See also Clipper chip
and encryption software, 209-211
information on Internet, 212
TeleRead and, 268-274
Government Access, 245, 287
Gramercy Press, 56-64
Grant, Larry, 33-35, 38, 48-54
Grant’s Flowers, 33-35, 48-54
Graphics, 10
Grassley, Charles, 215, 219
Green, Jordan, 119
Green Paper, 96, 273-276
Clipper chip compared, 275
NII Advisory Council on, 285-286
Gribble, Paul, 144
Grove, Andy, 74

H
Hackers, 78-79
Clipper chip and, 240
public PGP keys, 250
The Hacker’s Dictionary, 156
Hamilton, Robert, 71-72
Hammer, Randy, 177
Harmon, Dave, 7-11
Harnad, Stevan, 174
HarperCollins, 112
News Corps, 170
Harris, Eric, 136, 140, 142
Hart, Gary, 216
Hellman, Martin, 233-234
Helms, Jesse, 107-108
Helsingius, Johan, 221
Henderson, Bill, 3
Hertz, J. C., 3, 16
Hesseldahl, Arik, 120
High school use of Internet, 179
HIV Positive Dating Services, 293
HotWired, 113-114, 144, 147
Houghton, James, 280
How to Make a Fortune on the Information Super-highway ( Canter
and Siegel ), 24
Hubbard, Stanley, 280

Hubbard Broadcasting, 280
Hubert, Martin, 69
Huffman, David, 93-94
Huffman coding, 94
Hypertext, 161
Bless This Food: Amazing Grace in Praise of Food, 159
I
Images, 10
Information Industries Association ( IIA ), 269
Information kiosks, 222-223
Insider, 135
Intel, 35, 73-76
Intellectual piracy, 288
“An Interactive Citizens’ Handbook, ” 262-263
Interactive Week Publishing Alert, 110
Internal Revenue Service, 223
International Teletimes, 144
Internet Companion ( LaQuey ), 155-156
Internet Engineering Task Force, 55
Internet Phone, 324
Internet Relay Chat, 14
Internet Sleuth, 217
Internet Underground Music Archives, 13, 22, 80-81, 86-87, 90-104
“Arbeit Macht Frei, ” 96-97
World Wide Web, discovery of, 98
Isaacson, Walter, 148-149

ISDN phone connections, 86
Italy, 213-214
IUMA. See Internet Underground Music Archives
J
J. C. Penney, 141
Japan, terrorists in, 260-261
Jargon guide, 14
Jernigan, Paul, 172-173, 179-185
K
Katz, Jon, 123
Katzen, Sally, 287
Katzenberg, Jeffrey, 279
Kennedy, Anthony, 279
Kerouac, Jack, 302
Key escrow, 238
Killen&Associates, 32
King, Stephen, 157-158
Kinsella, Jim, 149
Klien, Eric, 292
Knight-Ridder, 129, 169
Kostmayer, Peter, 283-284
K12Net, 176-177
Kuster, Sharon, 194
L

Lande, Jim, 17
LaQuey, Tracy, 155-156
The Late Show. See Letterman, David
Learning Connections, 197
Legal issues. See also Copyrights
MCI and, 62-63
of RSA, 227
Lehman, Bruce, 20, 96, 222, 268, 269-272.
See also Green Paper on National Information Infrastructure, 264
Leno, Jay, 2, 82, 89
Letterman, David, 2, 75, 82, 87-89
Levy, Steven, 230-231, 234
LeWebLouvre, 83-84
Lewis, Peter, 106-107, 118-119, 217
Lewis, Sinclair, 216
Libraries, 112-113
copyrights and, 264
information kiosks, 222-223
national digital libraries, 22, 24, 118, 121, 162-165
TeleRead-style libraries, 162-165, 265-268
Lilienfeld, Bob, 27-29, 35-48, 77, 141
MCI and, 65
Lilienfeld, Jo Ann, 27-29, 35-48, 77, 141
Limbaugh, Rush, 247, 295, 303
Liquor advertising, 217
Litman, Jessica, 274
Lobbyists, 20-21
Local-standards principle, 219-220

London Telegraph, 109
Lord, Rob, 80, 86-87, 90-104
Loser Records, 102, 103
Love, James, 287
Lowry, Stuart, 37, 47
Luce, Henry, 146
Luddites, 3-4, 6
Luini, Jon, 98, 102
Lycos
business and, 50
print media and, 119-120
Lynx, 15
Lysator, 8
Lytel, David, 268, 289. ix. nf c
M. nf -. ix
McCarthy, Joseph, 323
McClatchy Newspapers, Inc., 166
McCracken, Ed, 277
McGraw-Hill, 110
McLarty, Mack, 278
Macmillan, 13, 110
Madness, 12

Magazines, 142-151
barriers to publishing, 150
Magid, Larry, 56
Mailing lists, 7-8, 14-15, 115
Mammoth Records, 140-141
Mariam, Mengistu Haile, 259
Markey, Ed, 280
Marriage through Internet, 301-311
Martin, Teresa, 107
MasterCard numbers, 77
Match. Com, 292
Matchmaking on Internet, 291-325
adultery on Internet, 316-323
Chen, Lee, story of, 311-315
marriage through Internet, 301-311
Matrix News, 296
Max, T. J., 113-114
May, Timothy, 230-231, 242-244
MCA, 280
MCI, 34, 54, 55-67
e-mail, 59-60
fees, 66
Murdock, Rupert and, 169-170
political contributions by, 280
MCI Mail, 2, 64-65
Meeks, Brock N., 9, 147
Mendel, Gregor, 176
MendelWeb, 176, 189

Metalitz, Stephen, 269
Microsoft
copyrights and, 270-271
Internet gadgets, 31
newspaper online service, 129
NII Advisory Committee, representation on, 277-278
Microsoft Network, 168-169
The Mini Page, 263
Mitnick, Kevin, 238, 244
Money, electronic, 78
Moriarty, Michael, 82
Morton, Father Bill, 224-225, 250-252
Mosaic, 15, 22, 155
Raleigh News&Observer on, 132
The Internet Adapter and, 31-32
Moss, Kate, 90, 94
Mozilla, Netscape, 44
MPEG compression, 94-95
MRI images, 186, 188
Multi-User Dungeons, 85-86
Murdock, Rupert, 170
Music, 86.
See also Internet Underground Music Archives
N
Nader, Ralph, 278
Nadler, David, 258
NandOLand, 130

NandO. Net, 131-135
NandO Times, 165
National Information Infrastructure, 263-264, 269.
See also NII Advisory Council
National Institute of Technical Standards, 235
National Security Agency, 229-230, 233-234
authority of, 236
Negative advertising, 79
Negroponte, Nicholas, 114
Neilsen, Lorri, 204, 205-206
Nelson, Marc, 192
Nelson, Ted, 155
The Net, 2, 82
Netiquette, 171
Net Market, 256
Netscape, 15, 22, 169
business and, 43-44
WebSpace with, 42
Net surfing, 302
New Century Network, 168
News Corps, HarperCollins, 170
Newsgroups, 7-8, 15
News&Observer. See Raleigh News&Observer
Newspapers, 105-109, 121-142
Newsweek, 2
NewtWatch, 283

New York Times, 108
Nicely, Thomas, 74
NII Advisory Council, 276-278
on Green Paper, 285-286
political donations by members of, 279-281
1984 (Orwell), 211-212
Nixon, Richard, 266
Noonan, Peggy, 119-120
Nova Scotia Technology Network, 198-199
O
O’Connor, Rory, 168
O’Connor, Sandra Day, 279
Offit, Avodah, 295, 300, 325
Oklahoma City bombing, 8
Omni, 110
Online Bookstore, Rockport, Massachusetts, 151-165
On the Road (Kerouac), 302
Opperman, Vance, 276-277, 278, 281, 282, 290
O’Reilly, Tim, 169
O’Reilly and Associates, 160, 169
Orwell, George, 211-212
Orwell’s Revenge, 246
Oxford, Gerry, 192
P
Packwood, Bob, 216

political contributions to, 280
Palo Alto Weekly, 109
Parental control, 132, 215
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) and, 253-254
Parents Music Resource Center, 92
Park View Education Centre, 195-207
Parrella, Bernardo, 213
Password recovery software, 255
Patent Office Web site, 270-271
Pathfinder site, 142, 145
connect fee for, 149
planning the, 147
Patterson, Jeff, 80, 86-87, 90-104
PC Magazine, 109, 114-115
Pearl Jam, 193
Peek, Robin, 111-112
Peightel, Joseph, 178
Pelster, Helen, 185, 188
Pelster, Martha, 103, 185
Pentium chip, 73-76
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, 193
People magazine, 109
Pettit, Mark, 57, 63, 64, 65
PGP: Pretty Good Privacy (Garfinkel), 227, 232
Phair, Liz, 12
Pictures, 10

Pioch, Nicholas, 83-84
Piracy of music, 99-100
Playboy, 1
Political activists and PGP, 257
Pornography. See Sex areas
Postal Service, 222-223
Powell, Lewis, 279
Powers, Julie Ann, 136-138
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 208-211, 224-262
AIDS activists using, 255
businesses using, 255-256
political ideas and, 257
religious communications, 250-252
teenagers using, 253-254
Privacy, 116.
See also Clipper chip;
Security of e-mail, 252-253
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 208-211
Samaritans and, 252-253
Prodigy, 2, 31, 124, 128-129
matchmaking on, 295
Project Gutenberg, 110, 152
Prostitution, 18
“Brandy’s Babes,” 29-30
Public key, 226-227
Public Key Partners, 227

Q
Quarterman, John, 154, 296
“Quick Reads, ” Time Warner, 171
R
Radio on Internet, 81
Radio Shack, 141
Raleigh News&Observer, 105-106, 120, 121-142, 165-168
Discoveries column, 136-138
Lawson execution story, 138-139
NandO. Net, 132-135
sports areas, 136
Random House, 13, 110
Rathje, William, 39, 40
Ravensburger, 36
RealAudio, 81-82, 323-324
Resnick, Rosalind, 49, 131, 215-216
Ribicoff, Abraham, 286
Rice, Donna, 216-217
Right-O-Way, 69, 72-73
Rimm, Martin, 218-219
Riordan, Teresa, 270
Rivert, Ronald, 226-227, 228
Roberts, Bert, Jr., 280
Romance on Internet, 291-325
Rovner, Sandy, 214

RSA Data Security, 227, 230
RSA encryption, 226-227
RSCPublic Key Partners, 250
Rubbish! The Archaeology of Garbage (Rathje), 39
S
Sackman, Gleason, 35-36
Sailor, 178
Sais, Jim, 271
Samaritans, 252-253
Samuelson, Pamela, 274
San Jose Mercury News, 108-109
Scalia, Antonin, 279
Scams on Internet, 73
Schlukbier, George, 128-130, 130, 140, 141
Scholarly Publishing: The Electronic Frontier, 22
Schools, Park View Education Centre, 195-207
Schwartz, John, 12-13, 117-118
Scully, John, 277
Security, 77.
See also Privacy Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) for, 208-211
Selverstone, Katy, 64
Sex areas, 17.
See also Matchmaking on Internet
alt. sex. bestiality, 18
government intervention in, 214
local-standards principle, 219-220

on NandO. Net, 132
Seybold, Jonathan, 108
Shamir, Adi, 226-227
Shein, Barry, 155-156
Siceloff, Bruce, 126
Siegel, Martha S., 23-24, 54, 116
Silicon Graphics, 188
The Silicon Jungle, 61-62
Silicon Snake Oil: Second Thoughts on the Information Highway
( Stoll ), 1, 6, 16, 106
Singapore, 212-213
Sitton, Claude, 126-127
SLED, 250
Smith, Richard M., 150
Smokin’ Joe’s tobacco products, 217
Snow, A. C., 105, 135
Snubbites, 3-4, 6
on WebMuseum, Paris, 83
Sound Check, 100-101
South Africa’s Weekly Mail&Guardian, 109
Spamming, 23
Spearman, Walter, 121-122
Spernow, William, 259
Spielberg, Steven, 279
Spitzer, Victor, 185
Sports Illustrated, 109

Spyglass Enhanced Mosaic, 42
Stacker, 94
Stahlman, Mark, 150
Stakeholders, 283, 290
Stanford Netnews Filtering Service, 258
Stanley Kaplan, 29
Steele, Robert David, 115-117, 255, 260, 261-262
Stevens, John Paul, 279
“Still Suck” ( Katz ), 123
Stith, Pat, 127
Stoll, Clifford, 1, 4, 6, 7, 10, 13, 16, 19-20, 83, 106, 112, 174-175,
282
Suicidal persons, 10-11
Sun Microsystems, 158
Sunset magazine, 146
SunSite UNC, 140-141
Internet Underground Music Archives on, 98
Support groups, 4-12
Surfing the Internet, 3
Surfing the Net, 302
SurfWatch, 215
Sweden, regulation in, 245
Swidler&Berlin, 271
Symbols for e-mail, 119
T

Tablet-size computers, 151
Talbott, Stephen L., 3
Tankersley, Nancy, 17
Taxpayer Assets Project, 277, 278
Teachers, 174-175
Telephone companies, 54
TeleRead, 21, 22, 162-164, 265-274
Green Paper and, 275-276
NII Advisory Council on, 284-285
profits from, 288-289
TeleReaders, 150-151
Telnet, 15
into Right-O-Way, 69
Terrorism, 260-262
The Terrorist’s Handbook, 8-9
Texas Internet Consulting, 296
The Internet Adapter, 31-32, 76
Thoreau, Henry David, 22
Ticer, Mark, 183-184, 194
Tidbits, 144
Time magazine, 2, 13, 109, 142-151
cyberporn article, 218
Time Warner, 13, 109, 110, 121, 142-151.
See also Pathfinder site
“Quick Reads, ” 171
Tobacco advertising, 217
Treasury Department, 235

U
Ugly Mugs, 80, 93
ULS Report, 40-41
“Umney’s Last Case” ( King ), 157-158
United Kingdom, 223-224
political activists in, 258-259
UNIX commands, 297
U. S. News&World Report, 146
Usenet, 122, 127
censorship of, 134
FBI collecting postings, 258
political freedom of, 133-134
sexual areas of, 132
V
Valenti, Jack, 277
ViaCrypt, 228, 232
Videotext, 124
Video transmissions, 82
Virtual Love ( Offit ), 295, 300
Virtual MeetMarket, 293
VISA numbers, 77
Visible Human Project, 173-174, 179-195
ideal candidate for, 182
VLSI Technology encryption chip, 240
W
WAIS Inc., 169

Walden ( Thoreau ), 22
Walkers in Darkness, 4-11
Walt Disney, 277, 278, 279
Warren, Jim, 18, 229, 244-245, 273, 287
Washington Post, 122
avoidance of Internet, 141
We, Gladys, 297-298
WebMuseum, Paris, 83
Web Personals, 293
WebSpace, 42-43
The WELL, 6, 147-148
West Publishing, 20, 25, 277-279, 286
political contributions by, 281-282
thwarted on Internet, 287
White, Byron, 279
White Rabbit Toys, 27-29, 35-48
Whitlock, David, 185
Windows Magazine, 285
Windows 95 operating system, 31
Winter, Peter, 168
Winterbotham, Russ, 25
Wired, 147
Max, T. J. on, 113-114
Singapore, article on, 212-213
“Still Suck” ( Katz ), 123
Wire tapping, 257-258
Wirt, Richard, 74

Wojtowicz, Ian, 144
Wolfe, Michael, 47
Women on Internet, 296-298
World Wide Web, 15
ix-. nf c
X. nf-. ix
Xerox, 107
Y
Yellow Pages, 54
Yeltsin, Boris, 257
Z
Zappa, Frank, 92
Zeeff, Jon, 53-54, 55
Zen and the Art of the Internet, 156
Zimmermann, Phil, 208-211, 224-230, 232, 238, 256-257, 262, 266
government harassment of, 244-245
legal costs for, 248-249

Transcriber’s Note
Errors deemed most likely to be the printer’s have
been corrected, and are noted here. The references are
to the page and line in the original. The following issues
should be noted, along with the resolutions. FedEx is
referred to three times with the space ( e. g. Fed Ex ).
These have been removed where it occurs to facilitate
text searches.
The quotation at 143. 12 ( see below ) is misprinted, but
it is not clear how. We’ve chosen to retain the opening
quote and provide the missing close. A similar thing
happens at 310. 14. The sense would dictate that the
quotation continue from ‘really cool chapel’. The added
closing quote is harmless to the sense.
On p. 259, the technical term ‘uuencoding’ is almost
certainly meant for ‘unencoding’, which makes no sense
in the context. We suspect an over-zealous but not very
technical editor/proofreader.
6. 34 The Diane Rehm [ e ] Show Removed.
13. 21 [ “ ] Business on the Net Removed.
44. 16 the browser’s technical Removed.
wizardry [, ] was winning
45. 22 it [ ’ ] s a social Inserted.
phenomenon.
64. 19 a little boilerplate from Removed.
their Dar [ e ] lene-bot
69. 1 same services that Fed [ Removed.
] Ex could.
71. 8 check out Fed [ ] Ex’s Removed.
service availability
83. 36 Within Le WebLouv [ r ] e > — Inserted.
there, I’ll say it anyway

94.5 routines of one kind or Inserted.
another are de rigue[u]r
for
94.6 the space that the material Added.
require[s]
95.21 for I[MU/UM]A to give Transposed.
MPEG one of its biggest
boosts
96.17 because you’ll be working. Removed.
[’]
113.21 M[u/o]st of the time I Replaced.
don’t know
123.24 I spent several week[s] Added.
talking
143.12 its duties to its Added.
stockholder[s]
149.3 “with advertising it should Added.
be in the black within a
year.[”]
152.35 to get special permission Removed.
to use Fed[ ]Ex.
170.6 just as the fledg[l]ing Inserted.
rockers of IUMA did
172.8 More than [a ]decade had Inserted.
passed.
181.11 than on using [the ]them Removed.
222.22 American[s] can educate Added.
themselves
230.17 the Nation[al] Rifle Added.
Association
233.34 authenticate their Replaced.
identi[f/t]ies from the start

238.4 by way of moronic Replaced.
exp[e/o]rt controls
242.23 postings to the Inserted.
Cyp[h]erpunks’ rather
public list
244.28 innocent citizens and law- Inserted.
a[b]iding businesses
247.8 millions of younger Added.
American[s] who surfed
freely
251.9 In the history of Anglican Replaced.
pastoral ca[s/r]e
257.8 It facilit[i/at]es the flow of Replaced.
ideas
257.27 used in Kenya, Mali, sic:
Senegal, Egypt, and [Mali] Somalia?
259.12 He confused PGP with Replaced.
u[n/u]encoding
302.27 like the Jack Kerouacs of Added.
[the ]’50s
310.14 for their fiftieth wedding Added
anniversary.[”] (probable).
315.30 [“]I‘m sure there are some Added.
people
329.15 Digit[i]al Media: A Seybold Removed.
Report,
334.1 [In of July], 1995, at least, sic: the
the lead article edition of?
Sample Chapter heading.

Complete Dust Jacket