NASA Facts
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Dryden Flight Research Center
P. O. Box 273
Edwards, California 93523
Voice 661-276-3449
FAX 661-276-3566
pao@dfrc. nasa. gov FS-2003-07-084 DFRC
XB-70
NASA Photo ECN-1814. XB-70A Valkyrie on ramp.
The B-70 Valkyrie, with a planned cruise speed of Mach 3 and operating altitude of 70,000 feet, was to be the
ultimate high-altitude, high-speed manned strategic bomber. Events, however, would cause it to play a far
different role in the history of aviation.
To achieve Mach 3 performance, the B-70 was designed to "ride" its own shock wave, much as a surfer rides an
ocean wave. The resulting shape used a delta wing on a slab-sided fuselage that contained the six jet engines
that powered the aircraft. The outer wing panels were hinged. During take off, landing, and subsonic flight, they
remained in the horizontal position. This feature increased the amount of lift produced, improving the lift-to-
drag ratio. Once the aircraft was supersonic, the wing panels would be hinged downward. Changing the position
1

control system, and a Lockheed JetStar was modified
as an in-flight SST simulator.
The XB-70 Valkyrie seemed to be a perfect testbed for
SST research. It was the same size as the projected
SST designs, and used similar structural materials,
such as brazed stainless steel honeycomb and titanium.
Thus, the XB-70A ' s role changed from a manned
bomber prototype to one of the most remarkable
research aircraft ever flown.
The XB-70A number 1 ( 62-001 ) made its first flight
from Palmdale to Edwards Air F orce Base, Calif., on
Sept. 21, 1964. Tests of the XB-70 ' s airworthiness
occurred throughout 1964 and 1965 by North American
Photo ED97-44244-3. XB-70 landing.
and Air Force test pilots. The Flight Research Center
of the wing panels reduced the drag caused by the prepared its instrument package. Although intended to
wingtips interacted with the inlet shock wave. The cruise at Mach 3, the first XB-70 was found to have poor
repositioned wingtips also reduced the area behind the directional stability above Mach 2. 5, and only made a
airplane ' s center of gravity, which reduced trim drag. single flight above Mach 3. Despite the problems, the
The downturned outer panels also provided more early flights provided data on a number of issues facing
vertical surface to improve directional stability at high SST designers. These included aircraft noise, operational
Mach numbers. Attached to the delta was a long, thin problems, control system design, comparison of wind
forward fuselage. Behind the cockpit were two large tunnel predictions with actual flight data, and high -
canards, which acted as control surfaces. altitude, clear-air turbulence.
As impressive a technological feat as the B-70 repre-NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, Calif.,
sented, the aircraft was under development at a time wind-tunnel studies led engineers at North American
when the future of the manned bomber was uncertain. Aviation in Downey, Calif., to build the second XB -
During the late 1950s and early 1960s, many felt that 70A ( 62-207 ) with an added 5 degrees of dihedral on
manned aircraft were obsolete, and the future be-the wings. This aircraft made its first flight on July 17,
longed to missiles. As a result, the Kennedy Adminis-1965. The changes resulted in much better handling,
tration ended plans to deploy the B-70. Two experi-and the second XB-70 achieved Mach 3 for the first
mental XB-70A prototypes were under construction at time on Jan. 3, 1966. The aircraft made a total of nine
North American Aviation when the program was Mach 3 flights by June.
canceled.
At the same time, a joint agreement was signed be -
At the same time there was growing interest in an tween NASA and the Air Force to use the second XB -
American supersonic transport ( SST ). Jet airliners had 70A prototype for high-speed research flights in
cut flight times by more than half in comparison to support of the SST program, selected due to its better
propeller-powered aircraft. A Mach 2 or 3 SST would aerodynamics, inlet controls, and a much superior
make a similar improvement over the new subsonic jet instrument package, compared to the first aircraft. The
airliners. The Flight Research Center ( FRC-now the NASA research flights were to begin in mid-June,
Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, Calif. ) had once the North American Aviation Phase I tests of the
several SST studies underway during the early 1960s. vehicle ' s airworthiness were completed. NASA re -
NASA ' s Douglas F5D-1 was used for landing studies, search pilot Joe Walker was selected as the project
a North American F-100C was modified to simulate pilot. The flights were to evaluate the aircraft on
SST handling qualities, a North American A-5A was typical SST flight profiles, and to study the problems
used to simulate an SST for tests of the air traffic of sonic booms on overland flights.
2

These plans went awry on June 8, 1966, when the
second XB-70 crashed following a midair collision
with NASA's F-104N chase plane. Joe Walker, F-
104N pilot, died in the accident. North American test
pilot Al White ejected from the XB-70 in his escape
capsule, but received serious injuries in the process.
Co-pilot Maj. Carl Cross, who was making his first
flight in the XB-70, was unable to eject and died in the
crash.
The deaths of Walker and Cross, and the destruction
of the second XB-70 had major consequences for the
research program. The second XB-70 had been se-
lected for the Phase II tests, which were to be con-
ducted jointly by NASA and the Air Force. With this
Photo EC68-2101. XB-70A on ramp.
aircraft now destroyed, only the first aircraft was
available. Given the aircraft's shortcomings, the Air
Force began to doubt that it would be able to meet the
FRC director Paul Bikle and Air Force Flight Test
Phase II test goals.
Center (AFFTC) commander Maj. Gen. Hugh Manson
created a joint FRC/AFFTC XB-70 operating commit-
The first XB-70 was undergoing maintenance and
tee on March 15, 1967. This was patterned on similar
modifications at the time of the accident to its sister
committees established for the X-15 and lifting bodies.
ship. It did not fly again until Nov. 3, 1966. Col. Joe
The NASA XB-70 program continued to receive Air
Cotton piloted it, while NASA research pilot Fitzhugh
Force assistance, in terms of aircraft support and Air
Fulton served as co-pilot. The flight reached a top
Force test pilots.
speed of Mach 2.1. Between November 1966 and the
end of January 1967, a total of 11 joint Air Force/
The first NASA XB-70 flight occurred on April 25,
NASA research flights occurred. Cotton, Fulton, and
1967, by Fulton and Cotton. By the end of March
Van H. Shepard of North American Aviation were
1968, another 12 research flights had been completed.
crewmen on these flights. A top speed of Mach 2.57
The pilots included Fulton, Cotton, and Shepard, as
was the highest attained during the remainder of the
well as Lt. Col. Emil Sturmthal and NASA research
XB-70 program.
pilot Don Mallick. The flights acquired data to corre-
late with an Ames ground-based SST simulator and
These flights were made as part of the National Sonic
the JetStar in-flight SST simulator at FRC. Other XB-
Boom Program. The XB-70 flew at differing altitudes,
70 research goals were to measure its structural re-
Mach numbers, and weights over an instrumented test
sponse to turbulence; determine the aircraft's handling
range at Edwards. The "boom carpet" area was deter-
qualities during landings; and investigate boundary
mined and the overpressure measured on two specially
layer noise, inlet performance, and structural dynam-
constructed housing units. The tests showed that a
ics, including fuselage bending and canard flight
large aircraft, such as the XB-70 or the projected SST,
loads.
could generate overpressures high enough to cause
damage. Moreover, when the XB-70 made a turn, its
The XB-70 underwent modifications after a final
shock waves converged, and often doubled the over-
flight on March 21, 1968. During research flights, the
pressure on the ground.
XB-70 pilots had frequently experienced trim changes
and buffeting during high-speed, high-altitude flights.
Following these tests, the XB-70 was grounded for
These resulted from clear-air turbulence and rapidly
maintenance that lasted 2 1/2 months. The Air Force
changing atmospheric temperatures. For a specialized
had concluded by that point that the XB-70 program
research aircraft, these characteristics were little more
should be turned over to NASA as soon as possible.
than annoying; on a commercial SST, however, they
3

amplitude. The XB-70's accelerometers detected the
disturbances, then signaled the aircraft's stability
augmentation system to damp out the motion. When
XB-70 research flights resumed on June 11, 1968, the
ILAF proved its ability to reduce the effects of turbu-
lence and atmospheric temperature changes.
Despite the accomplishments of the XB-70, time was
running out for the research program. NASA had
reached an agreement with the Air Force to fly re-
search missions with a pair of YF-12As and a "YF-
12C," which was actually an SR-71. These repre-
sented a far more advanced technology than that of the
XB-70. In all, the two XB-70s had logged 1 hour and
48 minutes of Mach 3 flight time. A YF-12 could log
NASA Photo ECN-792. XB-70A during take-off. this much Mach 3 time in a single flight.
would be uncomfortable for the passengers, increase The final XB-70 research flight occurred on Feb. 4,
the pilots' workload, and shorten the structural fatigue 1969. Fulton and Sturmthal made a subsonic structural
life of the SST. dynamics test and ferry flight. The XB-70 took off
from Edwards and flew to Wright-Patterson Air Force
The XB-70 was fitted with two small vanes for the Base, Ohio, where the aircraft was put on display at
Identically Located Acceleration and Force (ILAF) the Air Force Museum. The first XB-70 made 83
experiment. The vanes rotated 12 degrees at a rate of flights totaling 160 hours and 16 minutes, while the
up to 8 cycles per second. This induced a structural second XB-70 logged 46 flights in its brief life,
vibration in the XB-70 at a known frequency and totaling 92 hours and 22 minutes
4