Machine Gun Manual
By CAPTAIN H. DOUGLAS
Sherwood Foresters
National Team (England)
Kolapore Team (Great Britain)
British Rifle Team (Australian Tour)
A COMPLETE MANUAL TO MACHINE
GUNNERY
containing details of
MAXIM VICKERS LEWIS COLT HOTCHKISS
together with
DRILL
(Elementary and Advanced)
Fire Orders, Notes from the Front
and a mass of other
Useful Information
ILLUSTRATED
LONDON
HARRISON AND SONS
Printers in Ordinary to His Majesty Military Printers, Publishers and
Stationers

ST. MARTIN’S LANE, W. C.

For the best value in
MILITARY OUTFITS.
THE “MAXIM”
Trench Coat (as illustrated) with
detachable fleece lining. Made from fine quality Khaki Twill,
lined with rainproof lining and interlined with oiled silk,
£4. 10. 0
Light and warm, absolutely wind and rain proof.
Write for complete illustrated list.
71, NEW BOND STREET, W. 141&142, FENCHURCH
LONDON.
STREET, E. C.

Contents.

Maxim Gun. Page
General description 5
Plates and list of parts 11
To mount and dismount 16
„ load and unload 16
„ clean 17
Muzzle attachment 18
Fusee spring 18
Stripping and assembling 19
Examination and testing 21
Stoppages 23
Vickers’ Light Gun.
Plates and list of parts 31
Special features 35
To mount and dismount 36
„ load and unload 36
„ clean 36
Muzzle attachment 37
Fusee spring 37
Stripping and assembling 38
Stoppages 39
Examination and testing 39
Points to be attended to (Maxim and Vickers’) 40
Belt filling 40
Lewis Automatic Gun.
Plates and list of parts 43
Description 47
To load and unload 49
Stripping and assembling 50
Stoppages 53
Colt Automatic Gun.
Description 55
To load and unload 58

Stoppages 59
Stripping and assembling 62
Plates and list of parts 65
Hotchkiss Portable Machine Gun.
Component parts and plates 67
General description 71
Action of the mechanism 71
To strip and assemble the gun 73
Points to be attended to before firing 78
Rapid change of barrel in the field 80
Stoppages 82
Cleaning and care 83
Feed strip filling machine 83
General.
Duties 85
Section drill (with and without transport) 86
Elementary tests 90
Machine gun characteristics 90
Fire direction 91
Fire orders 93
Signals 94
War establishment 95
General machine gun course 97
Notes from overseas 100
Points to remember 100
Choice of gun position 100
Employment of machine guns 100
Occupation of positions 102
Trench work 106
In action 107
Village fighting 109
Attack on entrenched position 110
Co-operation 112, 118
Targets and ranges 112
Guns brigaded in action 115

Indication and recognition 116
Observation of fire 117
Ammunition supply 119
Mechanical troubles 119
Pack transport 120
Training in billets 121
Painting of guns 122
FOR THE BEST VALUE IN
MILITARY OUTFITS
Service Kit for any regiment in 36 hours.

£ s.
Service Tunic 3 3
Slacks 1 1
Bedford Cord Breeches 2 2
British Warm (fleece lined). 3 3
Sam Browne Belt (complete) 2 2
Complete! Illustrated List on request, or better still, call and
inspect our stock.
141&142, FENCHURCH STREET, E. C.
71, NEW BOND STREET, W.
LONDON.

“He sent home a Snapshot!”
How many tender voices have said this, with absolute joy?
Arthur Brisbane said: “A photograph can speak a million
words!” EVERY soldier should own a little camera. EVERY
army-man can photograph, and the snapshot records may be
PRICELESS in days to come. Our new List of Cameras at prices
25 per cent. to 50 per cent. below makers’ prices FREE, from
the Firm with 40 years’ Reliable Reputation for honest
photographic dealing. Send post card for Big List to-day.
(Cameras taken in exchange or bought for CASH.)
✥ ✥ ✥
43 years’ service.
SANDS, HUNTER&CO., LTD.
37, Bedford St., Strand, W. C.
The Specialists in Photographic Apparatus.

The Maxim Gun.
GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
Weight of the ·303-in. gun, 60 lbs. Weight of the tripod, 48 lbs.
Weight of ammunition box containing one filled belt, Mark VI 21
lbs., Mark VII 19½ lbs.
The gun may be considered as divided into two portions—the non-
recoiling and the recoiling. It is worked automatically by two forces—
the explosion of the charge which forces the recoiling portion
backwards, and a strong spring (called the fusee spring) which
carries it forward.
Non-Recoiling Portion.
The non-recoiling portion consists of the barrel casing and breech
casing, and is attached to the mounting by the crosshead and
elevating joint pins.
The barrel casing is of gunmetal, holding about seven pints of
water to keep the barrel cool when firing; it has three openings, one
on the upper right side near the breech for filling, one underneath
near the muzzle for drawing off the water, and the third (also near
the muzzle) for allowing the steam, but not the water, to escape. The
first two are closed with screwed plugs; the last is open and
connected with the steam tube, and carries the condenser nipple.
A cork plug is provided which can be inserted in the steam escape
hole when the gun is travelling, in order to prevent waste of water
from jolting. The plug should always be taken out before
commencing to fire, and put in again before the gun changes

position, unless the condenser is attached to the barrel casing and
can be conveniently moved with the gun.
To prevent the escape of water, there is at the forward end of the
barrel casing asbestos packing, which is held in position round the
barrel by the packing gland. At the rear end of the barrel there is a
cannelure, also filled with asbestos packing, which prevents the
escape of water when the gun is working, and a gunmetal valve
immediately in front of the barrel block, which prevents the escape of
water when the gun is not firing and the barrel home.
The steam tube consists of a fixed tube and an outer tube, termed
the slide valve, so arranged as to slide freely along the fixed tube. In
the fixed tube there is a hole near each end, and a third hole in the
threaded portion in front, to connect with the steam escape hole
which is bored in the solid part of the front end of the barrel casing.
This tube is fixed into the solid end of the barrel casing, and is
retained in position by a screw which, being kept in adjustment by a
keeper screw, ensures that the third hole coincides with the steam
escape hole. At the breech end it fits into a recess.
If the gun is fired with elevation, the valve slides backwards, and,
closing up the hole at the rear end of the tube, prevents the water
entering; at the same time it leaves the front hole uncovered, which,
being above the water level, allows the steam to enter the tube and
escape through the steam escape hole in the barrel casing. Similarly,
if the gun is fired with depression, the valve slides forward and
allows the steam, but not the water, to escape through the rear hole.
In the lower part of the barrel casing is the ejector tube through
which the empty cartridge cases are ejected from the gun. The tube is
fitted with a spring, which prevents the cases falling backwards into
the gun.
The breech casing consists of two outside plates, a bottom plate
which is riveted to them, and the rear cross piece, the whole being
closed by a cover.
The outside plates are dovetailed into the barrel casing, and,
together with the cover, are secured by means of a cover joint pin.
On the outside of the right hand plate there are the following
fittings:—(1) a socket and stud for securing and supporting the buffer
spring; (2) the resistance piece, and (3) the stud for the check lever.

On the outside of the left hand plate are three studs for holding the
fusee spring box, the rear one being on the slide mentioned below;
there are also two other studs on this plate for fixing a shoulder piece
to the gun if required. In both plates are slots partly closed by slides,
in which the crank bearings move, and on the inside of both plates
are solid cams which control the path of the extractor. Below these,
and supporting the side plates, are rests, along which the recoiling
portion travels.
Along the bottom plate lies the trigger bar, and underneath is a
bracket to which the elevating gear is attached by means of the
elevating joint pin.
The outside plates are connected at the rear end by the rear cross
piece, into which they both dovetail; this piece is fitted with (1)
hollow handles, which are also used for carrying oil, and are closed
by milled heads, fitted with camel-hair brushes; (2) a firing lever and
spring, the lower end of which fits into the trigger bar, while the
upper end is provided with a double button for firing; (3) an
automatic double-handed safety catch, which is so arranged that
unless it is held up the firing lever cannot be pressed forward; and
(4) a pivoted shutter, which, when moved to the right or left,
uncovers an aperture through which (when the lock is removed and
the crank handle vertical) the barrel can be inspected or cleaned
from the rear.
The cover is fitted with (1) springs to ensure the extractor dropping
on recoil; (2) a gunmetal block to keep the lock down when back, and
(3) at the rear end, a lock to fasten it. On the upper surface is the
tangent sight, consisting of a stem, a graduated plate and slide.
Running through the centre of the slide is a pinion, the teeth of
which work in the rack on the stem. A pawl is secured to the pinion
by a fixing pin. On the under side of one end of the pawl are teeth,
which engage in the circular rack on the slide.
When the slide is at rest the stud on the inside of the milled head
(nearest the slot for the slide spring) bears on the stud on the pawl
immediately over the teeth, being actuated by the slide spring, thus
forcing the teeth into the circular rack. This keeps the slide stationary
on the stem. On rotating the milled head, this stud is partly
disengaged from the stud on the pawl, thus permitting a second stud
on the milled head to press on one side of the V-shaped ramp at the

other end of the pawl. This action releases the teeth sufficiently to
permit the pawl being moved round the circular rack by the action of
the stud bearing on one side of the V-shaped ramp on the pawl; this
moves the slide along the stem. On releasing the milled head, the
spring positions the cover, thus causing the stud on the pawl to
become once more engaged with the stud on the milled head and
force the teeth into the rack.
Recoiling Portion.
The recoiling portion (which is mounted inside the non-recoiling
portion) consists of a barrel and two side plates which carry the lock
and the crank.
The barrel is coated with copper to protect it from rust; the
gunmetal valve referred to above, which prevents the escape of water
to the rear, is fitted just in front of the breech end, which is formed in
the shape of a block; this block has two studs, one on each side,
called the barrel trunnions, by means of which the barrel is attached
to the side plates.
The side plates are each provided with a hole to receive the barrel
trunnions, and in the case of the ·303-in. gun, with hooks for
engaging the recesses on the top of the barrel block; also guides in
which the flanges of the lock move, which are enlarged at the rear
end to act as crank stops; in addition each has a bearing, through
which the crank passes, thus connecting the latter with the barrel;
these bearings move in slots in the breech casing. The left side plate
is fitted with a connecting rod spring to hold the connecting rod
upright when the lock is removed, and the right side plate is fitted
with a side plate spring near the barrel, to keep the extractor in its
highest position when the lock is home. The left side plate is
prolonged to the front, and has a recess in which the bottom lever of
the feed block engages.
The crank is fitted with a connecting rod, which is free to rotate on
the crank pin, and, outside the breech casing on the right, with a
handle which has a curved projecting arm, and on the left with a
fusee, to which is attached a chain.

The connecting rod is attached to the crank by means of an axis
pin, called the crank pin, and is arranged to take the lock by means of
an interrupted screw, thereby connecting the crank and the lock. The
connecting rod is divided into two parts, enabling its length to be
increased by inserting washers of varying thicknesses. By this means
it is ensured that a firm pressure is kept on the base of the cartridge
at the moment of firing, thus preventing separations.
On the left of the breech casing there is a strong spiral spring,
called the fusee spring, the rear end of which is connected by the
fusee chain and fusee with the crank; the front end is attached to the
breech casing by means of the fusee spring box and adjusting screw,
which passes through the front end of the fusee spring box, and
through the nut at the front end of the spring.
The lock is attached to the connecting rod by the screwed head,
and when in the firing position closes the breech. In this position it is
held by the side levers, the crank (which bears against stops on the
side plates), and the connecting rod, the joint being slightly above
the horizontal, to prevent the breech being opened at the moment of
firing. The lock has a reciprocating motion communicated to it by the
rotation of the crank, and is kept in position during its backward and
forward movements by means of flanges working in guides on the
side plates, and, when at the end of its backward travel and clear of
the guides, by the gunmetal block underneath the cover.
The extractor is moved upwards by means of the side and extractor
levers, and when in its highest position, is retained there by means of
the side plate spring; this ensures the hole for the firing pin being
opposite the centre of the base of the cartridge when the lock is
home. The upward and downward movements of the extractor are
regulated by guide ribs and stops; the upper stop forms part of the
lock casing, and the lower one is removable.
The feed block, which fits under the cover into a recess cut in the
breech casing, is provided with a slide to which are attached two
pawls with springs, for the purpose of moving the cartridges from
right to left; the slide has a transverse motion given to it by means of
two levers which are fitted together; the top lever has a slot which
engages a stud on the slide, and on the bottom lever is a stud which
engages in a recess in the left side plate; by this means the slide is
connected with the recoiling portion. The feed block has also two

stationary pawls, which engage under the belt and prevent it slipping
backwards during firing. To facilitate the entrance of the cartridges,
the feed block is provided with a band roller, and in addition has
steel guides fitted above and below in the cartridge way, which
ensure the cartridges coming to the exact position where they can be
gripped by the extractor; they are prevented from being pushed too
far through to the left by means of the cartridge and bullet stops,
which are inside the feed block.
The gun is supplied with cartridges from a belt which passes from
right to left through the feed block. This belt is formed by two pieces
of webbing connected together by eyelets and brass strips of two
lengths, the projecting strips showing how far the cartridges should
be inserted; the belt is made thick at the edge next the bullets by
being folded over a piece of cord, so that the cartridges may be kept
parallel in passing through the feed block, and lie evenly in the
ammunition belt boxes.
(Flexible steel belts are now being used. These fold into their box
in sections, and by withdrawing a pin the unexpended portion can be
detached and packed away immediately. They appear to be giving
considerable satisfaction, inasmuch as “belt troubles” are practically
impossible.)
Converted Guns.
Converted guns are the original ·45-in. guns made to take the
·303-in. cartridge.
The conversion consists in the substitution of ·303-in. barrels for
the ·45-in. barrels and the adaption of the mechanism to the smaller
calibre by the introduction of new parts or the alteration of existing
parts.
The Mark II differs from the Mark I in being fitted with the service
·303-in. barrel and muzzle attachment for ball firing, whereas the
Mark I has a special muzzle attachment and a heavy barrel. The
difference in the barrels affects also certain other parts. In both
Marks I and II converted guns the attachment for ball firing must
always be on the guns, as, owing to the greater weight of the
component parts, these guns will not work without it.

The tangent sight is graduated to 2,500 yards.
The weight is 64 lbs.
In other respects they resemble the ·303-in. gun except that the
connecting rod is not above the horizontal and that there is a space of
about ⅒ of an inch between the projecting arm of the crank handle
and the resistance piece.
Ammunition.
All marks of ·303-in. ball ammunition may be used, but care
should be taken to select ammunition of the most recent
manufacture. Mark VII can, however, be used only in guns specially
modified to take it.
Explanation of Plates I and II.
1. End of crank.
2. Projecting arm of crank handle.
3. Crank handle.
4. Breech casing.
5. Fusee spring } Dotted
6. Chain } lines in
7. Fusee } Fig. 1.
8. Spring box }
9. Resistance piece.
10. Buffer spring.
11. Check lever.
12. Lock casing.
13. Firing lever.
14. Trigger bar.

15. Projection on trigger bar.
16. Trigger.
17. Tumbler.
18. Lockspring.
19. Firing pin.
20. Crank.
21. Crank pin.
22. Connecting rod.
22A. Cotter.
23. Side levers.
24. Sear.
25. Extractor.
26. Barrel.
27. Ejector tube.
28. Horns of extractor.
29. Keeper bracket.
30. Side cams.
31. Cover spring.
32. Cover.
33. Gib.
34. Adjusting screw for fusee spring.
35. Extractor spring.
36. Handles.
37. Double button.
38. Trigger bar spring.
39. Gib spring.
41. Extractor levers.

42. Belt.
43. Upper extractor stop.
44. Groove for side plate spring.
45. Cartridge grooves.
46. Ejector tube spring.
47. Side plates.
48. Guides in which flanges of lock move.
49. Guide ribs for extractor.
50. Cover lock.
51. Gunmetal block.
52. Hole for firing pin.
53. Safety catch.
54. Screwed head.
55. Connecting rod spring.
56. Crank bearings.
57. Slots, breech casing.
58. Crank stops.
59. Ammunition belt box, No. 2.
60. Feed block.
61. Top lever feed block.
62. Cork plug.
63. Feed block slide.
64. Top pawl.
65. Bottom pawl.
66. Band roller.
67. Barrel casing.
68. Screwed plug for filling.

69. Asbestos packing.
70. Packing gland.
71. Cannelure for asbestos packing.
72. Gunmetal valve.
73. Steam tube.
74. } Holes in steam tube.
75. }
76. Slide valve.
77. Steam escape hole.
78. Milled heads of oil brushes.
79. Oil brush.
80. Sight, tangent.
81. Sight, fore.
82. Shutter.
83. Shutter spring.
84. Shutter catch.
85. Notch for shutter catch.
86. Screwed plug for emptying.
87. Slides, right and left.
88. Gib spring cover.
89. Check lever collar.
90. Cover lock spring.
91. Safety catch spring.
92. Tangent sight spring.
93. Bottom lever feed block.
94. Trunnions of barrel.
95. Extractor stop.

96. Firing lever spring.
97. Shutter pivot screw.
Plate I.
GUN MAXIM, ·303 INCH.
SIDE ELEVATION.
Plate II.
GUN MAXIM ·303 INCH.
PLAN WITH COVER REMOVED.

MOUNTING, TRIPOD, ·303-in. MAXIM GUN,
MARK IV.
The mounting consists of a crosshead (a), elevating gear (b), and
socket (c), mounted on three legs.
It is constructed to give 13 degrees elevation and 25 degrees
depression at heights varying from 14½-in. to 30-in. from the axis of
the gun to the ground. By arranging the position of the rear and front
legs respectively, elevation may be given up to about 43 degrees and
depression to 55 degrees. An all-round traverse can be obtained.
The crosshead (a), to which the gun is pivoted, is formed with a
pivot to fit into the socket (c) and an arm (d) which carries the
elevating gear (b).
The elevating gear, which is actuated by a hand wheel (v), consists
of an inner and outer screw (right and left-handed) and a nut
working within a tumbler (g). The tumbler is split and provided with
a jamming bolt (h), by which the wear may be taken up. The inner
part of the screw is attached to the crosshead by a chain. Chains also,
for future manufacture and replacement, will secure the joint pins to
the mounting.
The socket (c) is bored to receive the crosshead and is provided
with three lugs (n), to which the legs are hinged; a jamming block
and screw with handle (f) is attached to the front to secure the
crosshead in any desired angle of traverse; the block works in a
recess in the upper portion of the crosshead and prevents it from
rising. Both faces of the rear lug and one face of each front lug are
fitted with clutch plates having radial serrations to correspond with
similar serrations on the faces of the leg joints. Joint studs with disc
spring and jamming handle (s) are

Plate III.
MOUNTING TRIPOD ·303 INCH, MAXIM GUN MARK.
SCALE = ⅛
SIDE ELEVATION.
A Crosshead
B Elevating gear
C Socket
D Arm, crosshead
F Screw, clamp checking traverse
G Tumbler, elevating gear
H Bolt, jamming elevating gear
J Front legs

K Rear leg
M Shoes
N Socket lugs
S Stud, joints, a jamming handle, front legs
T Joint pin, a jamming handle rear leg
V Handwheel elevating gear
fixed to the front lugs, by which the legs are securely clamped to
the socket in the required position.
The legs (j, k) are of tubular steel, the lower ends being fitted with
shoes (m) to steady the mounting on the ground, and the upper ends
having a joint with radial serrations mentioned above. The rear leg is
provided with a joint pin with nut and jamming handle (t).
On a portion of the periphery of the leg joints, numbers are
stamped at regular intervals so that when read in conjunction with a
zero mark the relative position of the legs to their normal position
may be readily seen.
A strap is fixed to the rear leg to secure the three legs during
transport.
When firing, the ammunition box is placed on the ground on the
right side of the gun.
Weight of mounting 48 lbs. variable.

TO MOUNT AND DISMOUNT GUN.
To Mount Gun.
Machine gunner No. 1 will carry tripod into position, elevating
screws being equally exposed. Cross head upright. Legs clamped
tight.
No. 2 will carry gun to right side of tripod, holding rear cross piece
with left hand, gun muzzle to rear under right arm. Kneel on left
knee, facing tripod, and supporting weight of gun on right knee,
place it on tripod, pushing in and turning down the crosshead joint
pin. Remove cork plug finally from steam escape hole, No. 1 fixing
elevating joint pin.
To Dismount Gun.
No. 1 removes crosshead and elevating joint pins, No. 2 replaces
cork plug and removes gun as in mounting, carrying it to its original
position in rear, No. 1 following with the tripod. Joint pins will then
be pushed home and turned down, legs folded and clamped.

TO LOAD AND UNLOAD GUN.
To Load.
Pass the tag of belt through feed block from right side, turning
crank handle with right hand on to buffer spring, and pull belt
through with left hand to left front as far as it will go, let go crank
handle, the first cartridge will then be gripped by the extractor.
Again turn crank handle on to buffer spring, and pull belt to left
front, letting go crank handle—the gun is then ready for firing.
Make each motion clear and distinct.
On pressing double button the gun will fire automatically until
pressure is released.
To Unload.
Turn crank handle twice in succession on to buffer spring, letting it
fly back to the check lever each time. Press up the bottom pawls and
remove belt from feed block, then release the lock spring by pressing
double button.

TO CLEAN GUN.
Mechanism.
Equal parts of G. S. lubricating oil and paraffin should be used,
each part being thoroughly dried and slightly oiled with G. S.
lubricating oil.
The various parts can easily be got at by “hanging” the lock as
follows:—
Turn the crank handle on to buffer spring, raise lock slightly till
clear of guides, allow handle to come back a little, and lock to rest on
top of guides, when it will be fixed and easily accessible.
Barrel.
Turn crank handle over against buffer spring, open cover, raise
lock, and as the crank handle is allowed to come slowly back raise it
and let it rest upon the top of the rear crosspiece.
The cleaning rod may then be used from muzzle of barrel.
Daily cleaning is absolutely necessary for at least ten days after
using ball ammunition and the bore should at all times be left coated
with oil.
(A double-ended pull through may be used to remove hard
fouling.)
Treatment in Frosty Weather.
In frosty weather, when water is kept in the barrel casing, a
blanket or some other thick covering should be kept wrapped round
the barrel casing to prevent the water freezing. The working parts of
the gun should only be slightly oiled with a lightly-oiled rag. In
climates where the temperature is likely to fall much below freezing

point, not more than about 5 pints of water should be put into the
barrel casing (25 per cent. of glycerine mixed with the water will
prevent it from freezing so quickly).

MUZZLE ATTACHMENT.
The force of recoil is increased by the use of the muzzle
attachment. Defects in the working of the gun are overcome by this
means.
It consists of a steel cylinder with a hole bored longitudinally
through it, the front end of cylinder being partially closed by a screw.
Gases escaping from the muzzle of barrel are partially confined to the
interior of attachment, the pressure of the gas acting on the muzzle
of barrel giving additional recoil.
It is fitted by unscrewing the packing gland from the barrel casing,
and screwing the attachment into the packing gland by means of the
steam tube and packing gland key.
The attachment should be removed from the gun and cleaned
immediately after firing, all metallic fouling being carefully scraped
away.

THE FUSEE SPRING.
On the left of the breech casing, the rear end being connected by
the fusee chain and fusee with the crank, the front end is attached to
breech casing by means of fusee spring box and adjusting screw
which passes through front end of fusee spring box and through the
nut at front end of spring.
To Weigh and Adjust.
Cock the lock, place loop of spring balance over knob of crank
handle and pull vertically upwards, resting wrist on breech casing,
the reading indicated when crank handle commences to move will be
the weight of the fusee spring. This should be between 5 and 7 lbs.
(for converted Mark I Guns between 10 and 12 lbs.).
If spring is over, or not up to weight, remove fusee spring box and
adjust by means of adjusting screw, six turns making a difference of
about 1 lb. (Turning screw clockwise increases weight and vice
versa.)
The tension should always be kept as high as possible, consistent
with maintaining the normal rate of fire (500 rounds per minute).

STRIPPING THE GUN.
The gun is stripped in the following order:—
Note.—All pins are driven in from right to left, and out in the
reverse direction.
(i) Lock and Feed Block.
Raise the cover, turn the crank handle on to the buffer spring, see
that the extractor drops, place finger between the extractor and stop,
raise the lock and allow the crank handle to come slowly back on to
the check lever; slide the live cartridges out of the extractor, keeping
the latter down. Give the lock ⅛ turn to the left and lift off. Lift the
feed block out.
(ii) Fusee Spring Box.
With the right hand at the rear and the left hand at the front, press
the box forward until clear of the lugs, and remove. Disconnect the
fusee chain and remove the box and the spring. Care should be taken
to throw no cross strain on the chain.
(iii) Tangent Sight and Cover Lock.
Lower the cover, putting a screwdriver across the breech casing
under the gunmetal block, drive out the axis pin of the stem and
remove with its piston and spring. Close the cover, press in the cover
lock, and, with the large screwdriver, remove the stop screw; the lock
with its piston and spring can then be removed.
(iv) Cover.

Drive out the fixing pin of the cover joint pin, remove the collar
and joint pin and take off the cover.
(v) Rear Crosspiece.
Drive out the tapered fixing pin, grasp with the left hand the left
handle of the rear crosspiece, slightly raise the casing and, with the
mallet, strike the top edges of the casing alternately until the rear
crosspiece is clear of the dovetails on the casing. Lift out the trigger
bar.
(vi) Slides, Right and Left, and Check Lever.
Pull out the slides. Drive out the fixing pin from the check lever
collar, remove the collar and check lever.
(vii) Recoiling Portion.
Fold back the connecting rod on to the crank, turn the crank
handle to a vertical position, and draw out to the rear the recoiling
portion. Disconnect the side plates by dropping them and springing
them outwards. If necessary, by taking out the fixing pin, the crank
handle can be driven off with a drift and hammer, and the fusee
unscrewed from the left bearing of the crank; but as a rule these
parts should not be stripped.
(viii) Foresight.
The position of the foresight should first be carefully marked.
Remove the fixing screw and foresight.
(ix) Steam Tube and Packing Gland.

Up-end the barrel casing so that it stands on the rear end of the
breech casing. Remove the keeper screw and unscrew the steam
tube. Unscrew and remove the packing gland and packing.
(x) Breech and Barrel Casings, and Ejector Tube Spring.
Rest the barrel casing on a table or bench, with the filling hole
uppermost, and the breech casing clear of the bench; place the left
hand under the breech casing and strike the top edges alternately
with a mallet, when the casings will come apart. Lift the ejector tube
spring with the point of the screwdriver and tap out the spring with
the drift and hammer. (In converted guns remove fixing wire and
unscrew fixing screws.)
Note.—The breech and barrel casings should only be separated
when repairs are necessary. Care must be taken not to strike the
barrel casing, and the blows should be struck as close to the
dovetailing as possible.
(xi) Lock.
(a) Release the lock spring, lay the lock on a bench, left side
uppermost. Drive out the sear, tumbler, and lock spring axis pins. (b)
Remove the keeper bracket, extractor levers, lock spring, tumbler,
firing pin, and sear. (c) Drive out the trigger axis pin, extractor stop
keeper pin, remove the trigger, extractor stop, and slide the extractor
from the face of the lock casing. (d) Push out the gib spring cover,
take out the gib spring and gib. (e) Drive out the extractor spring
fixing pin, and remove the extractor spring. (In converted guns the
extractor spring is riveted to the extractor.)
Note.—(e) should only be done in case of breakage.
(xii) Feed Block.
(a) Drive out the spring fixing pin of the top and bottom levers,
drive out the bottom lever and remove the top lever and slide. (b)
Drive out the axis pin of the bottom pawls and remove pawls with
feed block spring. (In converted guns unscrew fixing screws and
remove feed block springs.) (c) Drive out the fixing pin of the band

roller axis pin, remove the collar, axis pin, and band roller. (d)
Remove the top pawls from the slide by pressing them outwards. The
springs for the pawls, if weak or broken, are only to be removed by
an armourer or qualified artificer.
(xiii) Tangent Sight.
(a) Remove the top fixing screw of the graduated plate. (b) Run the
slide off the stem. (c) Remove the fixing screw of the milled head,
and lift the latter off the slide. (d) Remove the fixing pin, pawl and
pinion from the slide. (e) Place the milled head, face upwards, on a
bench; then with a drift, applied to the rectangular nib on the spring
slide, knock the latter down flush with the face, when it can be lifted
out with the pliers.
(xiv) Rear Crosspiece.
(a) Drive out the axis pin of the firing lever, and remove the latter
with its spiral spring. (b) Drive out the axis pin of the safety catch,
and lift out the latter, also the piston and spring from their seating.
(c) Remove the pivot screw and shutter. (d) Unscrew, from the
handles, the milled heads with their leather washers and oil brushes.

EXAMINATION AND TESTING.
Before assembling the gun all parts should be tried in their places
separately to see that they work freely, and test friction of recoiling
portions as follows:—
Cock lock, remove fusee spring box and spring, turn crank handle
upwards, hold it with right hand and fusee with left, move recoiling
portion, with gun horizontal, backwards and forwards, to see that it
works freely and that barrel goes home. Weight necessary to move
recoiling portion should not exceed 4 lbs. (converted guns 7 lbs.)
tested by placing loop of spring balance over knob of crank handle,
and pulling to rear when handle is slightly above the horizontal.

ASSEMBLING THE GUN.
Reverse all the foregoing operations with the exception that the
recoiling portions must be replaced before the packing and packing
gland. In order to assemble the barrel and breech casings, they will
have to be turned upside-down—i. e., the filling hole down, and the
bottom plate of breech casing uppermost—they should be positioned
by the crosshead joint pin. Care must be taken that the ejector tube
spring is in position before joining the casings together. When
assembling the feed block the longer of the two bottom pawls must
always be placed at the front. When assembling the tangent sight, it
will be found convenient to place the slide on the stem before
attaching the milled head; in this position the pinion is prevented
from turning with the pawl when engaging the arms of the slide
spring outside the lugs in the pawl.

REPLACEMENT OF DEFECTIVE PARTS OF
THE LOCK.
Should any of the components belonging to the lock become
defective they can be replaced from the spare parts, without
stripping the lock right down. Proceed as follows:—
(i) Sear.
Fully cock, lift the sear, and let the firing pin engage with the
tumbler and trigger; with the lock on the bench, left side up, drive
out the sear axis pin, and remove the sear with its spring.
(ii) Tumbler.
Fully cock, thus engaging the firing pin with the sear; drive out the
axis pin of tumbler, pull the trigger slightly, and lift out the tumbler.
Note.—Care should be taken not to allow the screwed head to lift
the sear when once the tumbler has been removed.
(iii) Trigger, Lock Spring or Extractor Levers.
Release the lock spring, drive out the lock spring axis pin, remove
the keeper bracket, extractor levers and lock spring; if the trigger is
defective, drive out the trigger axis pin and remove the trigger.
(iv) Firing Pin.
Proceed as for (iii), but do not remove the trigger. Remove the
tumbler axis pin and tumbler, raise the sear, push the screwed head
out of its way, and the firing pin will drop out.

(v) Gib, Gib Spring, or Extractor Spring.
This will necessitate the removal of the extractor from the face of
the lock casing. Release the lock spring, drive out the lock spring axis
pin, remove the keeper bracket and extractor levers; next drive out
the keeper pin of the extractor stop, remove the latter, and slide the
extractor off the lock casing: push out the gib spring cover, and
remove the spring or gib as the case may be. If the extractor spring
requires replacing, drive out its fixing pin and remove.
Note.—The serviceable components are replaced in the reverse
order.

STOPPAGES.
1. Temporary.
Due to (a) Failure of some part of the gun of which a duplicate is
carried, or faulty ammunition; (b) neglect on the part of member or
members of the detachment. A high standard of training will avoid
this.
2. Prolonged.
Due to failure of some part of the gun which cannot, as a rule, be
put right under fire, or without skilled assistance.
In addition to the instructions in the “stoppage” table, the
following points should be observed:—
1. If, when the cover is opened to investigate cause of stoppage, it is
seen that extractor is not quite up, no attempt should be made to
raise it. It should be first pushed down before the crank handle is
turned over to the front, as by this means all risk of firing a cartridge
accidentally is avoided.
2. When a temporary stoppage necessitates the employment of the
spare lock, feed block, etc., the part which has been removed should
be repaired as soon as possible, making it again available as a
reserve.
3. Should it ever be necessary to release the lock spring, with the
lock out of gear, this should be done with the extractor fully up, and
firing pin hole opposite firing pin.
4. As the clearing of a stoppage often knocks the sights off the
aiming mark, care should be taken that the gun is immediately
relaid.

TABLE OF STOPPAGES.
I. II. III. IV.
Position of Immediate action. Probable cause. Prevention of
crank handle recurrence.
and its
indication.
FIRST (i) Turn the crank The extractor
handle on to the buffer has not dropped.
spring, pull the belt to This may be due
the left front, and let go to:—
Indication. the crank handle. (a) Too heavy
The lock is fusee spring.
unable to (ii) If failure recurs, (b) Excessive (b) Clean and oil
come back lighten fusee spring by friction, due to working parts.
far enough to three “turns.” want of oil; grit Examine the
allow the or tight pockets belt, which
extractor to in the belt, or should be dried
drop. excessive if damp; or if the
packing in stoppage is due
cannelure or to a new or stiff
packing gland. belt, the pockets
should be
plugged. If due
(c) Partial loss of
to excessive
the force of the
packing,
explosion due to
examine and
—
repack cannelure
(i) Worn barrel. or packing gland.
(ii) Defective (c) (i) The barrel
ammunition. should be
examined at the
first opportunity,
and if much
worn in the lead
should be
changed.
SECOND. (i) Force the crank (i) (a) Damaged
handle on to the buffer cartridge. The
spring. Open the cover cartridge is
and examine the unable to enter
cartridge on the face of the chamber
the extractor. If a completely,

damaged cartridge, or an although it has
undamaged cartridge commenced to
with the front portion of do so.
Indication. a separated case (b) Separated
The lock is adhering to it, clear the case with front
unable to go face of the extractor and portion adhering
fully home re-load. to undamaged
after recoil. cartridge.
(ii) If an undamaged (ii) Separated (b) If a
cartridge with no front case. The front succession of
portion of separated case portion of the separated cases
adhering to it is found case causes an occur the
on the face of the obstruction and connecting rod
extractor, clear the face prevents the next must be
of the extractor and cartridge from lengthened. (See
replace the lock, keeping going into the para. 82.)
the crank handle on the chamber.
buffer spring. Take the
clearing plug (seeing
that the centre pin is
back) and insert it into
the chamber. Push the
pin well home by
allowing the lock to go
forward. Then keeping a
firm pressure on the
crank handle, give the
clearing plug a rocking
motion; withdraw the
lock; lever back the
handle of the clearing
plug, withdraw it (seeing
that the front portion of
the separated case is on
the clearing plug) and
re-load.
THIRD.
Indication. (i) Strike the crank (i) (a) Too light (i) (b) Clean and
The extractor handle on to check lever fusee spring. oil working
is unable to by a glancing blow with parts.
rise to its the palm of the hand. If
highest failure recurs,
position.

If the feed strengthen the fusee (b) Excessive
block slide is spring by three turns. friction.
jammed,
there is a
fault in feed.
Note.—If the continued strengthening of the fusee spring results
in the crank handle stopping in the first position, change the
lock, putting the fusee spring back to normal; if failure recurs
take muzzle attachment into use. (See para. 44.)
(ii) If (i) fails, slightly (ii) A cartridge is (ii) Carefully
raise the crank handle, fed up slightly examine the belt.
pull the belt to the left crossways, or a
front, let go the crank long brass strip
handle, and then strike it is bent.
down on the check lever.
(iii) A. If (i) and (ii) fail, (iii) A. (1) Badly (iii) A. (1)
examine feed block slide. filled belt, or a Carefully
If jammed, No. 1 holds belt with worn or examine the new
up the crank handle and loose pockets. belt.
opens the cover. No. 2, The cartridges
with the assistance of projecting
No. 1, removes the feed unevenly from
block, and replaces it by the belt prevent
the spare one. it entering or
Meanwhile No. 1 forces passing freely
down the horns of the through the feed
extractor, and places the block.
crank handle on the (iii) A. (2) Belt (iii) A. (2) See
buffer spring. As soon as box not being in that the new belt
the spare feed block is in line with the feed box is in line.
position, No. 1 closes the block; the belt
cover and pulls the top does not lead up
cartridge of a fresh belt correctly to the
into position and lets go feed block and
the crank handle. becomes
jammed.
Note.—The effect of a fault in feed is
that the top pawls, being engaged
behind a cartridge in the belt, are
held fast when some obstruction,
such as above, prevents the belt from
passing freely through the feed
block. The recoiling portions, being
connected by the top and bottom
levers to the slide, are arrested and

prevented from going home. The
distance they are held back depends
upon the point at which the
obstruction asserts itself.
(iii) B. If free, No. 1 (iii) B. (1)
opens the cover. No. 2 Damaged
forces down the horns of cartridge
the extractor. No. 1 grooves.
clears the face of the (2) Broken gib
extractor, and changes spring.
the lock. He removes the (3) Broken gib.
cartridge in positioning In these cases
the feed block and re- the extractor is
loads. prevented from
rising to its
highest position.
It may be
necessary
sometimes to
slide the
cartridge or the
empty case
upwards, when
clearing the face
of the extractor.
(4) Thick-
rimmed
cartridge.
Note.—If it is apparent that the
stoppage is due to a thick-rimmed
cartridge, it will not be necessary to
change the lock.
FOURTH. (a) Turn the crank (a) (1) No
handle on to the buffer cartridge in the
spring, pull the belt to chamber.
Indication. the left front, and let go (2) Defective
That there the crank handle. ammunition.
has been no (b) If (a) fails, place the (b) (1) Broken or
explosion, or, crank handle on to the damaged firing
if any, that buffer spring twice, pin.
there has change the lock, and re-
been little or load.
no recoil, the

lock
remaining in
(2) Broken lock
its forward
spring.
position.
Note.—If the continued lightening of the fusee spring results in
the crank handle stopping in the third position, take muzzle
attachment into use, and put fusee spring back to normal weight (see
para. 44).
Note.—Worn or damaged side or extractor levers may result in the extractor
being unable to rise, or if the side levers are bent, there may either be a succession
of separated cases, or the lock may become jammed.
The causes of prolonged stoppages are so varied that they cannot
be set out in detail. The following are amongst the most probable,
and the detachment should be thoroughly trained to recognize them
and to apply such remedy as lies in their power pending a permanent
repair:—
(i) Broken Cover Springs.
The extractor may not drop when the lock is drawn back, and the
gun will stop with the crank handle in the first position. This may
possibly be overcome by liberal oiling of the lock, but in any case
single shots can be fired by holding the crank handle forward until
the extractor drops by its own weight.
(ii) Broken Ejector Tube Spring,
Causing either a block in the ejector tube or an accumulation of
empty cases in the breech casing. It may be found possible to keep
the gun in action if care is taken to prevent the latter.
(iii) Cotter working out,

Thus causing the screwed head and connecting rod to become
separated. To remedy proceed as follows:—
(a) Take out the cotter. (This will be found either on the crank
or at the bottom of the breech casing.)
(b) Press down the screwed head with a large screwdriver to
lock the cock.
(c) Turn the screwdriver edgeways and insert it behind the
horns of the extractor and between the face of the barrel
and front of the lock flange, and force the lock to the rear.
(d) Turn crank handle on to the buffer spring, press down the
extractor, raise the lock and remove the live cartridge,
then lift out the lock.
(iv) Damaged Parts of the Lock, no Spare Part being
available.
The gun will fire without the sear, or if the bents of the sear or
firing pin are badly worn or broken off, but only single shots, and
only by pressing and releasing the double button quickly.
The gun will also fire if the nose of the trigger or bent of the
tumbler is badly worn or broken off, but only rapid firing. In this
case the gun will fire the instant the crank handle reaches the check
level, although the double button has not been pressed.
The gun can be worked as follows:—
(a) Group the cartridges in the belt, say 20 or 30 rounds each
group.
(b) Lay the gun before commencing to load, place crank handle
on buffer spring, pull belt to left and let handle go;
repeat, but before allowing the handle to reach check
lever and the gun to fire, grip the rear crosspiece with left
hand to control gun in the ordinary way.
If necessary firing can be stopped by throwing the filled end of the
belt over the breech casing to the left.

When the firing has been stopped as described above, hold the
crank handle with the right hand, open the cover, press down the
horns of the extractor, draw the lock back, and, if there is a live
cartridge on the face of the extractor, remove the feed block and belt,
close the cover, and allow the lock to fly forward, when the live
cartridge, which is on the face of the extractor, will be fired
automatically. The lock can then be changed with safety. On no
account should the lock be allowed to fly forward until the feed block
has been removed and the cover shut.
If, on drawing the lock back, it is found that there is no live
cartridge on its face, the lock may be changed at once, and the
necessity for removing the feed block and the subsequent
precautions will not arise.
(v) Gunmetal Valve Working Loose.
This will prevent the barrel from going home. It may be
temporarily remedied by tapping it round with a hammer and punch,
but it should be tightened at the earliest opportunity with the gib key,
the barrel being removed from the gun.

·303–inch Vickers Gun.
Explanation of Plates IV and V.
Similar numbers indicate corresponding parts in all the plates.
1. Casing, barrel.
2. Tube, steam.
3. Bracket, foresight.
4. Gland.
5. Casing, breech.
6. Cover, front.
7. Cover, rear.
8. Sight, tangent.
9. Bar, trigger.
10. Lock, rear cover.
11. Rear-crosspiece.
12. Lever, firing.
13. Lever, trigger bar.
14. Catch, safety.
15. }
16. } Plugs, screwed.
17. Protector, screwed, condenser boss.
18. Plug, cork.

19. Guide, front barrel bearing.
20. Crosshead.
21. Cams, right and left.
22. Steps of cams, right and left.
23. Catch, front cover.
24. Pin, screwed, joint cover.
25. Pin-T, fixing, rear-crosspiece.
26. Pin, screwed, fixing, crank handle.
27. Slides, right and left.
28. Roller.
29. Pin, screwed, joint, rear-crosspiece.
30. Bracket, check lever.
31. Lever, check.
32. Bracket, elevating joint.
33. Stop, mounting.
34. Plate, bottom, breech casing.
35. Shutter, sliding.
36. Hooks of front cover catch.
37. Hole for keeper pin, front cover catch.
38. Lever of catch, front cover.
39. Grooves in front cover catch to clear “36.”
40. Plunger, front cover catch.
41. Bridge, rear cover.
42. { Spring tangent sight.
{ Piston „ „
43. Grooves in rear cover for ribs on “5.”
44. Ramps, rear cover.

45. Spring, rear cover lock.
46. Spring, trigger bar.
47. Lug on trigger bar for “46.”
48. Base of tangent sight stem.
49. Hooks of rear cover lock.
50. Lug on rear cover lock for “45.”
51. Slot in trigger bar for “86.”
52. Lug on trigger bar for “13.”
53. } Thumbpiece, sliding shutter catch.
54. }
55. Plunger, sliding shutter catch.
56. Arms of rear-crosspiece.
57. Grips, rear-crosspiece.
58. Pawl, firing lever.
59. Spring, safety catch, with piston.
60. Pin, screwed axis, safety catch.
60A. Finger grips, safety catch.
61. Pin, screwed, axis, firing lever.
62. } Thumbpiece, firing lever.
63. }
64. Pin, keeper, check lever.
65. { Piston, check lever.
{ Spring, „ „
66. Recess in check lever for “65.”
67. Barrel.
68. Casing, lock.
69. Plate, side, right.

70. Crank.
71. Handle, crank.
71A. Tail of crank handle.
71B. Knob of crank handle.
72. Rod, connecting.
72A. Stem of connecting rod.
73. Fusee.
73A. Chain, fusee.
74. Spring, fusee.
74A. Hook, fusee spring.
75. Box, fusee spring.
75A. Screw, adjusting, fusee spring.
76. Block, feed.
77. Cannelure in “67” for asbestos packing.
78. Trunnion block, barrel.
79. Lock.
80. Levers, side (pair).
81. Socket of side levers for “72A.”
82. Extractor.
83. Gib.
84. Spring, gib.
85. Cover, gib spring.
86. Trigger.
87. Lever, extractor, right.
88. Tumbler.
89. Spring, lock.
90. Pin, firing.

91. Sear.
92. Spring, sear.
93. Flanges of lock casing.
94. Interruptions in flanges of lock casing.
95. Slots in lock casing for “99.”
96. Bearings on lock casing for “80.”
97. Upper extractor stop of lock casing.
98. Bent of extractor lever for “80.”
99. Lugs on side levers for “95.”
100. Bush, axis, side levers.
101. Pin, split, keeper, bush, axis, side levers.
102. Horns of extractor.
102A. Grooves in extractor for “79.”
103. Shoulders of extractor for “87.”
104. Grooves in extractor for side plate springs.
105. Hole in extractor for “90.”
106. Recess in extractor for “83.”
107. Pin, axis, trigger.
108. Pin, axis, tumbler.
109. Key of pin, axis, tumbler.
110. Projection on firing pin for “89.”
111. Lever, top, feed block.
112. Lever, bottom, feed block.
113. Pins, split, fixing, top and bottom levers, feed block.
114. Stud of top lever for feed block slide.
114A. Slide, feed block.
115. Pawl, top, feed block, rear.

115A. Thumb grips of “115” and “116.”
116. Pawl, top, feed block, front.
117. Spring, top pawls, feed block.
118. Pawls, bottom, feed block (pair).
119. Pin, axis, bottom pawl, feed block.
120. Finger plate of bottom pawls, feed block.
121. Spring, bottom pawls, feed block.
122. Cup, muzzle attachment.
123. Casing, outer, muzzle attachment.
124. Cone, front, muzzle attachment.
125. Gland, muzzle attachment.
126. Screw, clamping, cup, muzzle attachment.
127. Disc, muzzle attachment.
128. Vent, bullet, muzzle attachment.

Plate IV.
VICKERS GUN.
Plate V.
VICKERS GUN.

VICKERS LIGHT MACHINE GUN.
The principal features are as in Maxim with the following
exceptions:—
Total weight, ready for firing, is 38½ lbs. (Maxim, 67 lbs.).
Length, width and depth slightly less than Maxim.
Barrel casing is of corrugated steel (affording greater cooling
surface).
Rear end of barrel—i. e., chamber—goes back into barrel casing,
thus greatly assisting cooling of barrel where it is most essential.
Foresight is blade pattern, with protector.
No ejector tube or spring, there being an opening at bottom of
breech casing through which empty cases fall. (Shutter requires to be
opened before commencing firing.)
Tangent sight is 2½ in. nearer rear end of breech casing and is U
pattern.
There is no buffer spring or resistance piece.
An elevating stop on outside of left-hand plate, this preventing the
bracket head of the mounting damaging the fusee spring box.
No stud for the shoulder piece.
Connecting rod has an adjusting nut and washers.
Crank handle revolves in the opposite direction to Maxim.
Lock is inverted and joined to connecting rod by an interrupted
flange.
Lock has no extractor spring, as cases fall off extractor when clear
of barrel.
Lock can be easily stripped with the hand screw which forms the
axis pin of the trigger bar lever.
Top pawls are made with finger pieces, and can be pressed down
by hand to allow belt to be released, having only one spring, which is
removable.

Fusee spring can be adjusted without removing box, as the vice pin
of screw is loose.
Fusee has a clutch fixture, and is easily removable.
No tools required to strip lock or change barrel.
Gun cannot be fired unless cover is down.
Greater general strength, especially in recoiling portions.
Sighted to 2,900 yards.

TO MOUNT AND DISMOUNT GUN.
As for Maxim (page 16).

TO LOAD AND UNLOAD GUN.
To Load Gun.
Pass tag end of belt through feed block from right side. Pull crank
handle on to roller with right hand. Pull belt straight through as far
as it will go with left hand. Let go crank handle; the first cartridge
will then be gripped by extractor. Repeat as above; the first cartridge
will then be in chamber and another gripped by upper part of
extractor. Gun is then ready for firing.
To Unload Gun.
Pull crank handle on to roller twice in succession (without pulling
belt), letting it fly forward to check lever each time. Press up bottom
pawls and remove belt from feed block, then release lock spring.

TO CLEAN.
As for Maxim (page 17).

MUZZLE ATTACHMENT.
A steel muzzle attachment for ball firing is provided to assist
recoil. When attachment is fitted on gun, the gland replaces the
packing gland. The muzzle cup is fixed to barrel by a clamping screw,
body of which lies in a circular groove on barrel, thus preventing
muzzle cup from being blown off should clamping screw become
loose. Outer casing is attached to gland by an interrupted flange and
spring-keeper pin. Front cone screws into front end of outer casing,
and, to protect its face from erosion, is covered by a thin steel disc,
which, when badly eroded, can be replaced by a spare one. Gland and
front cone have flanges which are grooved to receive the combination
tool provided for assembling and stripping purposes.

FUSEE SPRING.
On the left of breech casing there is a strong spiral spring called
the fusee spring, the rear end of which is connected by the fusee
chain and fusee with the crank; the fore-end is attached to the breech
casing by means of the fusee spring box and adjusting screw, which
passes through the front end of fusee spring box, and through the
nut at the front end of spring.
The fusee spring can be adjusted without removing the box, as the
vice pin of the screw is loose. This screw is kept in position by two
nibs which fall into recesses, by the tension of the fusee spring. The
fusee is attached to the crank by means of a stem and lugs, and is
easily removed.
To Weigh and Adjust Fusee Spring.
Take out lock; place loop of spring balance over knob of crank
handle, and, standing on left side of gun, press down check lever with
left hand. Pull spring balance vertically up, resting right wrist on
breech casing. The reading indicated when crank handle commences
to move will be the weight of fusee spring. This weight should be
between 7 and 9 lbs. If spring is over, or not up to weight, adjust by
means of vice pin. Generally six clicks (three revolutions) make a
difference of about 1 lb. Adjust by ½–lbs. as a rule.
Turning vice pin clockwise increases weight and vice versa.
Tension of spring should always be kept as high as possible,
consistent with maintaining normal rate of 500 rounds per minute.

TO STRIP AND ASSEMBLE GUN.
The gun is stripped in the following order:—
Lock.
Clear extractor by revolving crank handle twice; pull crank handle
on to roller; raise rear cover, place finger between extractor and stop,
lift lock, at same time allowing crank handle to move slowly forward
until lock is released from side plates. Give lock one-sixth of a turn in
either direction and lift out.
Feed Block.
Release front cover catch, raise front cover, and lift out.
Fusee Spring Box.
With right hand at rear and left hand at front, press box forward
until clear of lugs and remove. Disconnect fusee chain and remove
box and spring. Care should be taken to throw no cross strain on
chain.
Fusee.
Turn fusee to rear until lugs on stem are free to be withdrawn.
Ball Firing Attachment.
Withdraw split pin. Give outer casing one-sixth turn and remove
it. Unscrew front cone. Loosen clamping screw of muzzle cup and

revolve cup till clamping screw coincides with flat on barrel. Remove
muzzle cup. Unscrew and remove gland.
Slides, Right and Left.
Raise rear cover, unscrew rear crosspiece screwed fixing T-pin,
and hinge down rear crosspiece. Pull out sides.
Recoiling Portion.
Draw recoiling portion out to rear. Disconnect side plates from
barrel, removing left one first (for convenience only). If necessary, by
taking out fixing pin, crank handle can be driven off with a drift and
hammer, but as a rule this should not be stripped.
Roller.
Remove split fixing pin, collar, and roller.
To Strip Lock.
(a) See that lock is cocked; force out side lever split pin and axis
bush. Remove side levers and extractor levers and slide extractor
from front of lock casing. (b) Release lock spring and push out the
trigger and tumbler axis pins. (c) Remove trigger, tumbler, lock
spring, firing pin and sear with spring. To strip extractor, push out
gib spring cover and remove spring and gib.
Tangent Sight and Spring.
(a) Remove top fixing screw of graduated plate. (b) Run the slide
off stem. (c) Remove fixing screw of milled head and lift latter off
slide. (d) Remove fixing pin, pawl, and pinion from slide. (e) Place
the milled head, face upwards, on a bench; then, with small

screwdriver applied to rectangular nib on slide spring, knock latter
down flush with face, when it can be lifted out with pliers.

EXAMINATION AND TESTING.
Before assembling the gun all parts should be tried in their places
separately to see that they work freely.
Test friction of recoiling portions (as Maxim, page 22).
Assembling.
Reverse all foregoing operations with exception that recoiling
portions must be replaced before packing and packing gland. When
assembling lock, care must be taken that lock spring is replaced with
lock in fired position, and when all the other parts are assembled.
When assembling rear crosspiece see that pawl of firing lever
engages with trigger bar lever. When assembling tangent sight, it will
be found convenient to place slide on stem (axis end) before
attaching the milled head; in this position pinion is prevented from
turning with pawl when engaging arms of spring outside lugs on
pawl.

REPLACEMENT OF DEFECTIVE PARTS.
(As Maxim, page 22.)

STOPPAGES.
(As Maxim, page 24.)

DAMAGED PARTS OF LOCK, &c.
(As Maxim, page 29.)
POINTS TO BE ATTENDED TO.
Before firing. During firing. After firing.
Oil Working and Working parts during Bore immediately.
recoiling temporary cessation
portions. of fire.
In handles. Thorough clean in
barracks.
Test Recoiling Release lock spring.
portions.
Fusee spring.
Examine Barrel. Clamps of tripod not Unload and clear
loose. extractor.
Spare parts.
Belt. Refill belts. Empty cases (no live
rounds amongst
them).
Water Fill barrel Watch consumption. Empty out.
casing.
Add glycerine in
frosty
weather.

BELT FILLING.
All numbers, also drivers, should be instructed and practised in
belt filling by hand, and also with the belt-filling machine, as follows:
—
Belt Filling by Hand.
One Man Loading by Hand.—Sit on the ground, with the right foot
doubled under the left thigh, the left foot resting on the outer side
and drawn towards the right knee.
Place the belt on the left knee, with the tag pointing to the right.
Take hold of the first brass strip between the forefinger and thumb;
then with the remaining fingers and ball of the thumb, hold the belt
so that the pockets will remain open. Take five cartridges in the right
hand, insert into pockets, taking care to avoid doubling over the thin
edge of webbing. Now place the belt on the knee, and, placing the
tips of the fingers on the front of the belt, finally adjust the cartridges
by pushing them forward with the thumb until the points of the
bullets are in line with the ends of the long brass strips. Continue to
load and adjust in fives, and make a final inspection when placing
the belt in the box.
Belt Filling by Machine.
Fix machine so that crank handle can be worked with right hand.
Unfold loading tray and leg, the tray being secured to the left of
bed plate by pin, the leg being made rigid by turning up the keeper
plate on to the pin catch.
Turn the steel guide plate (on bed plate) outwards. Pocket opener
must be far enough back to clear the belt.
Place belt behind roller and into belt guide. Edge of belt to be
touching side of guide, projecting end of long brass strips to point

away from cartridge plunger, and to pass under the steel guide.
Pawl to lie on top of belt.
Turn steel guide into position again and draw belt through with
left hand until first pocket is opposite pocket opener.
Fill hopper with cartridges and replenish as required.
Revolve crank handle continuously (not too fast) until belt is filled.
(A light pressure should be kept on the belt with the left hand until
the weight of the filled portion is sufficient to assist the pawl.)

The Lewis Automatic Machine Gun.
LIST OF PARTS.
1. Butt plate.
2. Butt plate screws (2).
3. Buttstock.
4. Butt tang screw.
5. Butt tang.
7. Butt latch.
8. Back sight bed spring.
9. Back sight bed spring screw.
10. Butt latch spring.
11. Back sight bed.
13. Feed cover.
14. Back sight leaf.
20. Back sight slide.
21. Ejector.
22. Guard side pieces (2).
23. Back sight axis pin washer.
24. Back sight axis pin.
26. Receiver.

27. Magazine pawls spring.
28. Stop pawl.
29. Rebound pawl.
30. Trigger.
31. Feed operating stud.
32. Safety (right and left).
33. Trigger pin.
34. Feed operating arm.
35. Feed pawl.
36. Feed pawl spring.
37. Bolt.
38. Charging handle.
39. Guard.
40. Cartridge guide spring.
41. Sear spring.
42. Sear spring box.
43. Magazine pan.
44. Ejector cover.
45. Extractors (2).
46. Gear stop.
47. Striker fixing pin.
48. Gear stop pin.
49. Gear stop spring.
50. Striker.
51. Cartridge spacer ring.
52. Gear.
53. Mainspring casing.

54. Magazine top plate rivets (6).
55. Mainspring.
56. Collet pin.
57. Mainspring collet.
58. Magazine centre.
59. Mainspring rivets (2).
60. Magazine latch spring.
61. Gear casing.
62. Magazine latch.
63. Centre key.
65. Gear case hinge pin.
66. Feed operating arm latch.
67. Magazine top plate.
68. Receiver lock pin.
69. Spacer ring rivets (5).
70. Interior separators (25).
71. Radiator casing rear, locking piece.
72. Rack.
74. Radiator casing rear.
75. Piston connecting pin.
76. Barrel.
77. Gas cylinder.
78. Radiator.
79. Piston.
80. Regulator key stud.
81. Gas regulator key.
82. Gas chamber.

83. Gas chamber band.
84. Gas regulator cup.
85. Clamp ring.
86. Front sight.
87. Clamp ring positioning screw.
88. Clamp ring screw.
89. Barrel mouthpiece.
90. Radiator casing front.
91. Sear (rear).
92. Hand grip.
93. Oil well.
94. Oil well cap.
95. Oil brush.
96. Spade grip butt tang.
97. Deflector.
98. Deflector arm.
99. Deflector arm joint pin.
100. Deflector clip.
101. Deflector clip joint pin.
102. Deflector bracket.
103. Deflector clamp screw.
104. Deflector latch.
105. Deflector latch screw.
106. Deflector clamp screw washer.
107. Deflector clamp screw stop nut.
108. Shell catcher bag.
109. Mounting yoke.

110. Mounting yoke clamp.
111. Mounting yoke bronze pillar.
112. Mounting yoke pillar screw.
113. Mounting yoke clamp hinge pin.
114. Mounting yoke clamp pin.
115. Mounting yoke clamp key.
116. Back sight elevating screw.
117. Back sight elevating screw head.
118. Back sight elevating screw head pin.
119. Back sight elevating screw head spring.
120. Sear pin.
121. Butt latch pin.
122. Mounting yoke pillar hinge pin.
123. Mounting yoke chain.
124. Mounting standard.
125. Light field mount bottom cross brace.
126. Light field mount centre post.
127. Light field mount feet (2).
128. Light field mount front legs (2).
129. Light field mount front yoke.
130. Light field mount knuckle joint.
131. Light field mount knuckle joint pin.
132. Light field mount rear brace.
133. Light field mount T joint, centre.
134. Light field mount T joint, side (2).
135. Light field mount top lug.
136. Barrel mouthpiece spanner.

137. Magazine filling handle.
Plate VI.
LEWIS AUTOMATIC MACHINE GUN.
Description.
The gun complete weighs 25¼ lbs. and can be withdrawn from its
leather case and put into action immediately.
There are only 62 parts in the gun proper—these cannot be
wrongly assembled, and require no adjustment.
No water is used for cooling purposes, the steel barrel being closely
fitted with a jacket of aluminium having deeply-cut grooves
throughout its length. Over this is a thin tubular steel casing, the
muzzle end of which extends (in reduced diameter) beyond the end
of barrel, the special shaped mouthpiece screwed to the end of barrel
serving the double purpose of firmly securing the radiator in place
and of directing the powder blast of each discharge as to greatly
increase the “ejector action” of this blast in sucking cool air through
the grooves of the radiator. The system is so effective that the gun is

found to give a slightly greater velocity to the bullet than can be
obtained from the same length of barrel in a shoulder arm firing the
same ammunition. There is no excessive recoil and the gun can be
used with or without mount.
The gun is fed from a rotating drum magazine, which is controlled
by the reciprocating breech mechanism.
Shell Deflector.
The shell deflector is an attachment for controlling the ejection of
empty cartridge cases. It is very readily and quickly attached, and
when in position can be instantly swung back out of the way so that
the inside of the gun may be examined or any part of the mechanism
got at.
Light Folding Field Mount.
Is a three-and-a-half-pound folding mount adapted for general use
with infantry and cavalry. The mount is surprisingly rigid, and
permits of very accurate shooting. Both front and rear mounting
yokes, connected through centre post and rear brace, are pivoted
about the axis of the centre post, so that the gun is always free to
traverse. The gun is also free to turn within the yokes, so that the
sights may always be kept vertical, no matter what the position of the
feet. When the mount is attached, it is often convenient to use the
rear brace as a handle for carrying the gun.

Plate VII.
Light Folding Field Mount Complete.
To Put Gun into Action.
When a loaded magazine is dropped into place over the magazine
post, and the charging handle pulled to the rear as far as it will go
and then released, the gun is put into action by a pull on the trigger,
and continues to fire until the finger pressure on the trigger is
released, or until the magazine is empty.
Single Shots.
When the trigger is pulled once and very quickly released a single
shot is fired, this may be repeated at will until the magazine is empty.
Semi-Automatic Fire.

Within the limits of the magazine capacity the gun continues to
fire so long as the trigger is held back, and stops firing whenever the
trigger is released.
Full Automatic Fire.
Continued pressure on the trigger results in full automatic fire,
which need be interrupted only by the four seconds interval required
to replace emptied magazines by loaded ones.
During firing, before the magazine has been emptied, the gun
stops at the beginning of the forward stroke, in the “ready to feed”
position.
In this position the action is open and the chamber empty, but
firing can be resumed on pulling the trigger.
General Note.
Before Firing.—See to it that bore is clear, working parts
properly lubricated, and that tension of main spring is sufficient to
avoid missfires.
After Firing.—See that gun is immediately unloaded, and that
bore, working parts, and bearing surfaces are carefully examined,
cleaned, and properly lubricated as soon as possible.
It is especially important to oil piston head and inside of gas
cylinder; and to remove oil, and replace gas regulator cup.
Burrs found raised on any working part should be removed, and
any roughening on a bearing surface should be smoothed down with
fine emery or an oilstone.

TO STRIP AND ASSEMBLE.
The gun may be taken apart starting with the mechanism in any
position, but it is best, whenever practicable, to see that the
magazine is removed, the chamber empty, and the charging handle
at the extreme forward end of its stroke, before commencing to
dissemble. If this procedure is followed there will be no need to
readjust the mainspring tension or to make any other adjustment
when the gun is reassembled.
Stripping.
To dissemble gun, insert point of a bullet into slot leading to butt
latch and push forward against force of butt latch spring. At the same
time twist buttstock up and to left, then remove by withdrawing it to
the rear. This removes buttstock group which should not be further
dissembled.
Next, hold back trigger and pull back guard until clear of receiver.
This removes guard, which contains trigger mechanism and butt
latch.
Pull down gear casing until it drops clear of rack.
Pull back charging handle until it reaches end of slot, then
withdraw by pulling it out away from receiver.
Withdraw operating rod complete and bolt complete by pulling
them both together to rear until clear of receiver.
With point of a bullet push back on receiver lock pin, then twist
receiver up and to left and unscrew it from barrel.
The foregoing operations divide the gun into convenient groups.

DETAILED STRIPPING.
Buttstock Group.
It is best never to strip this group, but if found necessary, the
screws securing buttplate and butt tang to buttstock are readily
removed.
Receiver Group.
See that the feed operating arm is pushed to the right, then pull
back and remove feed cover.
Feed Cover.—From the feed cover the stop pawl, rebound pawl
and cartridge guide spring are readily removed with the point of a
bullet.
Back Sight.—The back sight may be stripped from feed cover by
removing bed spring screw.
Feed Operating Arm.—Remove feed operating arm complete,
by pushing forward on feed operating arm latch and then lifting clear
of magazine post. The feed pawl and feed pawl spring are removed
from feed operating arm by lifting them clear of the studs. The latch
should not be removed.
Ejector.—With the point of a bullet lift and pull out ejector cover
and the ejector.
Safety.—The safeties may be prised out of the receiver with a
bullet point.
Gear case hinge pin and centre key are permanently assembled
and should not be removed.
Gear Casing.—Push forward and remove receiver lock pin and
unhook gear casing from gear case hinge pin.
Mainspring Group.

To strip completely the parts assembled in gear casing, raise the
gear stop with the point of a bullet, and allow mainspring to unwind.
Gear.—Then unscrew the collet pin and shake out gear.
Mainspring.—Pushing with a bullet through the gear against
mainspring collet forces out mainspring casing from which
mainspring, with its locating rivets and mainspring collet, may also
be removed by the use of a bullet.
Gear Stop.—The gear stop and gear stop spring should not be
stripped, but in case of necessity they may be removed by driving out
the gear stop pin.
Guard Group.
The assembled guard contains trigger mechanism and butt latch.
To strip, punch out trigger pin and sear pin.
Trigger.—Pull back trigger and lift out.
Sear.—Remove sear, sear spring box and sear spring.
Butt Latch.—Punch out butt latch pin and remove butt latch, and
butt latch spring.
In ordinary practice the guard group need never be stripped.
Bolt and Rod Group.
The bolt and rod group comprises the bolt complete and operating
rod complete. These two assembled parts are withdrawn together
from the receiver, and may then be separated by lifting bolt clear of
operating post on rod.
Bolt Complete.
Feed Operating Stud.—Unscrew and remove feed operating
stud from rear end of bolt.
Extractors.—The extractors are spring-tempered and are sprung
into place. To remove, insert point of a bullet under extractor claw

and push head of extractor out and away from bolt. At the same time
draw the whole extractor forward until it is clear of its seating.
Operating Rod Complete.
Not usually stripped.
Piston.—The piston connecting pin is riveted in place, but may
readily be punched out in case it is desired to remove piston.
Striker.—The striker may be withdrawn after punching out
striker fixing pin.
Barrel Group.
Gas Regulator.—Lift out gas regulator key, then unscrew and
remove gas regulator cup.
Clamp Ring.—Using the gas regulator key as a tool, unscrew
clamp ring screw and remove clamp ring which carries front sight
and clamp ring positioning screw.
Radiator Casing.—Pull forward radiator casing front, and pull
back radiator casing rear which is permanently assembled to radiator
casing rear locking piece.
Gas Cylinder.—Unscrew and remove gas cylinder, using
operating rod as a wrench.
Gas Chamber.—Unscrew gas chamber, using, if necessary, barrel
mouthpiece wrench.
Barrel Mouthpiece.—Unscrew barrel mouthpiece. Thread is
left-handed.
Barrel.—Drive out barrel from radiator. This operation may
conveniently be accomplished before removing barrel mouthpiece by
unscrewing latter part way and then allowing barrel and radiator to
drop from a height of two or three feet on to a solid piece of wood,
striking on front end of barrel mouthpiece. The weight of the radiator
dropping from this height will usually loosen barrel sufficiently so
that it can be withdrawn by hand from radiator after mouthpiece has
been removed.

Gas Chamber Band.—Lift out gas chamber band from its recess
in radiator.
Assembling.
By reversing the operations for stripping the assembling of gun is
readily and quickly carried out. The following points, however,
should be noted:—
1. Be sure that gas chamber band is correctly inserted into its place
in the radiator before barrel is pushed home, and that barrel is
turned with gas port at bottom.
2. In replacing bolt and operating rod the cam slot in bolt is
slipped over striker and feed operating stud is screwed into bolt as
far as it will go.
3. After inserting bolt, rod, and charging handle, the charging
handle is carried forward to extreme end of its stroke before gear
casing is swung up into place and rack engaged.
4. The mainspring is wound up by engaging the rack and gear,
disengaging the guard, and pulling back on the charging handle until
the required tension is obtained. The gear is then disengaged,
charging handle moved completely forward, gear re-engaged and
guard pushed home.
5. To reduce tension of mainspring proceed as follows:—
Remove buttstock.
Disengage both guard and gear.
Move charging handle part way back.
Re-engage gear and guard.
Replace buttstock.

STOPPAGES.

Position of Immediate action. Remedy. Cause.
C. H.
Forward:
—
(a) Turn magazine free and Magazine empty.
change
(b) If magazine is fixed, pull Missfire or space
back C. H. or rotation not
sufficient.
(c) If recur, change magazine Examine rim of Faulty feed due to
old magazine damaged rim.
Feed arm pawl. Feed arm pawl, or
Stop pawls stop pawl.
(d) If missfire on pressing If too light— Weak or broken
trigger examine return adjust. return spring.
spring If broken— Damaged or
substitute broken striker.
If correct—
change rod
(e) If C. H. will not come back If dirty—clean Dirt.
pull back with wooden
If hot—cool
handle
C. H. back Pull C. H. back with Bulged cartridge
slightly wooden handle or pull (should never
through get into
magazine.)
Separated case
(unknown as
yet).
C. H. Examine ejection
nearly opening, if clear pull
back C. H. back and carry on
or, back to If return spring is weak, Clean gas Weak or broken
full adjust or change it cylinder, or return spring.
extent piston rod
and oil up
If it recurs, remove Friction in gas
magazine and gas cylinder or
regulator and fire. After moving parts.
firing put back gas
regulator, with large
hole to rear

If empty case is found, If recurs, Weak or broken
pull crank handle, raise examine extractors.
safety catch, remove extractor
magazine and empty. ejector
Examine rim Broken ejector.
If crank handle jams Magazine not
remove magazine really home, or
rim injured, or
catch broken.
If crank handle flies Change if Weak or broken
forward, insert new broken cartridge guide
magazine, otherwise spring.
examine cartridge guide
spring

The Colt Automatic Gun

(1914 MODEL.)
Weight of gun 35 lb.
„ „ tripod 58 „
Length of barrel 28 in.
Calibre ·303.
Rate of fire 400 shots per min.
The gun will swing horizontally through a complete circle of 360
degrees. The muzzle may be depressed 39 degrees and elevated 31
degrees, giving a vertical range of 70 degrees.
The barrel, which is detachable, is connected with the breech
casing in which the mechanism for charging, firing and ejecting is
contained.
Cartridges are automatically fed into the gun by means of a belt
containing 250, running from a box attached to the left side of the
breech casing.
The automatic action of the gun is effected by means of the
pressure of the powder gases in the barrel. There is a small radial
vent in the barrel near the muzzle, opening downward from the bore.
This vent is closed by a piston which fits in the gas cylinder
surrounding the outer edge of the vent. The piston is pivoted to the
gas lever so that it adjusts itself to the gas cylinder while the lever
swings in a vertical plane.
The belt is inserted from the left; the lever thrown downward and
rearward as far as it will go. This opens the breech and feeds the first
cartridge from the belt to the carrier; the lever is then released, and
the spring causes it to swing forward, close the vent and transfer the
cartridge from the carrier to the barrel; also cocking the hammer,
closing and locking the breech.

Plate VIII.
Gun mounted on Tripod, showing Belt
passing out.
(Right Side.)
On pulling the trigger the cartridge is fired. After the bullet has
passed the vent and before its exit from the muzzle, the powder gases
expand through the vent upon the piston and gas lever, which in turn
act on the breech mechanism, opening the breech, ejecting the shell
and feeding to the carrier another cartridge. The gas lever, returning,
under the action of the retractor spring, forces the cartridge into the
chamber, closing and locking the breech. If, instead of releasing the
trigger, it is held back, the same operation will be repeated as long as
cartridges are supplied, producing continuous fire at the rate of 400
shots or more per minute.
A safety lock secures the hammer, the latter being also used as a
piston for an air-pump, forcing a strong jet of air into the chamber
and through the barrel, removing all residue after the empty shell is
ejected.
The mainspring, firing-pin and extractor can be easily
replaced.
The mount consists of two principal parts:—

(a) Saddle with toothed arc.
(b) Yoke.
The saddle, in which the gun rests, is pivoted to the yoke by
means of the axis bolt, so as to swing in a vertical plane. The gun is
held in position on the saddle by the gun pin, which is inserted with
its handle vertical; in any other position of the handle the gun is held
secure by the gun pin lock screw.
Changes of elevation are made by means of the worm gear,
which engages in the teeth of the arc, and is operated by the hand
wheel, being secured at any angle by the arc clamp.
The lower part of the yoke is in the form of a spindle, and fits in
the socket of the tripod, being secured by a spindle washer and
spindle washer bolt.
The tripod consists of a socket to which the legs are hinged. The
two front ones being interchangeable, brass shoes are attached to
prevent their sinking into the ground during firing.
A seat is attached to the lower portion of the rear leg, also a leather
tool bag containing spare parts, etc.
Equipment.
4 feed belts (capacity 250 rounds per belt).
4 feed boxes, for feed belts.
1 leather tool bag, containing the spare parts and accessories.
Spare Parts.
1 main spring.
1 hammer.
1 cartridge extractor and spring.
1 sear spring.
2 firing pins.

2 firing pin springs.
2 firing pin lock pins.
2 shell extractors.
2 shell extractor springs.
2 shell extractor pins.
2 handle locks.
2 bolt pins.
2 trigger springs.
4 cotter pins for piston-pin.
1 piston spring.
Accessories.
1 oil can.
1 combination spanner and screwdriver.
1 jointed cleaning rod.
1 combination operating handle and screwdriver
3 drifts.
Instructions for Operation.
Attach box in firing position on the left side of mount.
To Load.—Push belt through opening above the box from the left
and draw it as far as it will go. Let go the belt. (Never pull on the belt
while the gas lever is being operated.) Swing the gas lever downward
to the rear until it strikes the bottom plate of the gun. Release gas
lever, when it will resume its normal position.
The gun is now ready to fire.

To Fire.—Hold back trigger. The firing will continue until the
trigger is released or until all the cartridges in the belt are fired.
To hold the gun ready for firing, push the safety latch on right side
of gun below rear sight from “fire” to “safe.”
To Draw Belt and Cartridges from the Gun.— Push forward
the knurled head on the right side of the gun near the belt exit and
draw the loaded belt out to the left. Then operate the lever once by
hand, as in loading, ejecting the loaded cartridge that remains in the
chamber.
Missfires.—Wait a moment in order to make sure that it is a
missfire and not a hangfire. Then operate the gas lever by hand, as in
loading, which will eject the unexploded cartridge and will re-load
ready for continued firing.
Stoppage from any Cause.—Whether the stoppage occurs from
the jamming of a cartridge, missfire, or breakage of a part of the gun,
operate the lever once by hand before making any effort to free the
mechanism.
If the stoppage occurs when the lever is partially retracted, push it
backward until it strikes the bottom plate. Never push it forward.
This will generally free the mechanism, unless a broken part stops it.
If not freed, draw belt and cartridges from the gun and examine for
breakages.
In case of jamming, due to failure to eject empty shell, draw back
the lever until it strikes the bottom plate, letting the live cartridge
and carrier descend into the bottom position, and remove shell with
cleaning rod. The lever is now free to resume its normal position. In
this case, examine the extractor, and, if broken or chipped, or the
spring does not work well, replace it.
Precautions to be observed.—After dismounting mechanism
and before firing is begun, a belt of cartridges (preferably dummies)
should be placed in the gun and the lever operated several times by
hand, as in loading, to see if mechanism is in proper working order.
Caution.—With the gun hot from rapid firing, a cartridge should
not be allowed to remain in the chamber longer than six or seven
seconds, as it may be discharged by the heat. In case it is not
possible, from any cause, to withdraw the cartridge within this time,
and the lever is in its normal position, no harm will be done; but if

lever is partially retracted, the bolt is then withdrawn and a “blow
back” may occur. In either event, keep away from in front of the
muzzle until satisfied that the danger from the explosion of the
cartridge by heat is passed.
To Dismount Breech Mechanism.
1. Take hold of the gas lever pin and throw the gas lever rearward
until it strikes the bottom plate. Then release the gas lever, when it
will fly forward to its original position. This movement cocks the
hammer.
Plate IX.
COLT AUTOMATIC GUN—Sectional View
MODEL 1914
COLT AUTOMATIC GUN
showing position of Gas Lever when disengaging Barrel Lock,
A, to remove Interchangeable Barrel.

2. On the right-hand side of the gun, in front of the trigger, is the
handle lock, which is a pin with a small projecting lever resting in a
horizontal position. Turn this lever upward and backward as far as
possible. Withdraw the handle lock. This releases the handle, which
then can be removed rearward. The handle contains the mainspring,
hammer, sear, sear spring, trigger and trigger spring. To remove the
hammer and mainspring from the handle, pull back the trigger,
release the sear by pulling the nose down, when the hammer and
mainspring will fly out, as the sear holds them in place.
3. To remove the bolt, throw the gas lever rearward as far as
possible, and while holding it in that position insert the small end of
the handle lock in the hole on the right hand side of gun, pushing the
handle lock in as far as it will go. This removes the bolt pin from the
bolt. Withdraw the handle lock pin, but leave the bolt pin in the
position in which it now is—i. e., projecting from the left side. The
bolt is now free to be removed from the rear of the gun.
4. The extractor and firing pin can be removed from the bolt by
pushing out the small pins that hold them in place.
To Assemble.
1. Insert the bolt and push forward as far as it will go.
2. Place hand on gas lever, holding it up against bottom plate.
3. Push in bolt pin from left hand side as far as it will go.
4. Then release the gas lever.
5. Replace handle, locking it in position with handle lock.
To Remove Barrel.
Take hold of gas lever pin and throw the gas lever rearward until it
strikes the bottom plate, and hold in this position. Withdraw handle
lock and insert small end of same in small hole in rear end of gun,
and on right side, pushing handle lock in as far as it will go. This
causes the bolt pin to lock slide to receiver and to hold gas lever back.

Bolt pin will then project from left-hand side. Leave in this position.
Replace handle lock.
Attached to gas cylinder will be found barrel lock; place small end
of combination wrench under point of barrel lock and press down
and out until it clears barrel. Engage combination wrench in slot in
under side of barrel just forward of gas cylinder and unscrew; then
pull barrel forward and out.
To Replace Barrel.
Push barrel in as far as it will go and engage threads; complete this
operation with wrench until lines on top of barrel and receiver
coincide. Swing barrel lock up into slot. Release gas lever by pushing
in bolt pin from left-hand side as far as it will go with handle lock.
Replace handle lock. Do not remove or replace barrel until gas lever
has been thrown to rear and locked in that position.
To Strip.
Lay gun on right side, muzzle to left. Turn side plate lock screw to
left to bring cut in same clear of groove in side plate screws. Unscrew
side plate screws and remove. Place right hand on rear of left-hand
side plate, press downward, and with the left hand raise front of
plate. Turn gun over and remove right-hand plate in same manner.
Turn gun so as to bring bottom plate upward. Raise gas lever slightly
with left hand, and lift bottom plate out. Raise gas lever again and
pull out slide pin. Push slide to rear until it remains. Remove
retracting spring tubes by pulling nearest tube toward you and
pushing other away from you. Pull or push out gas lever bracket pin,
then lift gas lever and connections out of bracket. Push carrier pin
out with pointed end of screwdriver and lift carrier out of receiver.
Unscrew locking screw and belt guide screw in belt guide. Lift belt
guide out. If belt guide should stick, push the point of screwdriver
under the slide at rear of belt guide and gently pry upward. Remove
handle lock and pull handle out to rear. Push slide to rear and insert
end of handle lock in small hole in rear of receiver in side nearest to

you, and push out bolt pin. Pull slide to front and out and then push
bolt out to rear with finger. Remove safety and trip.
To Assemble.
Hold gun with slot in receiver upward. Insert bolt, front end first.
Replace slide, pushing to rear as far as it will go. Replace bolt pin,
pushing it in as far as it will go by using end of handle lock. Replace
belt guide and screw, having locking screw engage groove in belt
guide screw. Replace carrier, having flat side or bottom up and
carrier dog down. Insert pin. Replace gas lever, having piston drop
into hole in gas cylinder. Adjust gas lever until large pin holes in gas
lever and gas lever bracket are opposite each other, then insert gas-
lever bracket pin. Next place retracting spring tubes in position
having slot in followers align with long slot in retracting spring tubes.
Force follower over projecting end of retracting connection by
pressing follower end inward, at the same time slightly compressing
retracting springs until pilot at end of tube clears bracket. Press tube
inward at bracket end and into hole for pilot. Place bottom plate in
position by putting tongue at rear end in receiver first and flush with
rear end of receiver. Place safety in position. Right-hand side plate
should be next placed in position, taking precaution to have slide
pushed to rear as far as it will go and the feed lever on plate carried
to rear as far as it will go, so that feed lever will lay between
projections on slide when plate is in position. To place plate in
position, have the dowel at rear of plate enter hole for same, in
receiver, at the same time having groove near edge of plate engage
rib on bottom plate and gas lever bracket pin enter hole in front end
of plate. Turn gun over to rest on plate, draw slide forward, having
slot at forward end of slide engage end of gas-lever connection. Hold
gun at rear end with right hand to prevent moving. Take hold of gas-
lever pin with the left hand and swing gas lever outward until slide
pin can be pushed into hole in slide through gas-lever connection,
having flattened end of slide pin enter slot in side plate. Place trip in
holes and slot in receiver. Place left-hand slide plate in position by
the same method as right-hand plate. Place side plate screws into
holes in front and rear of side plates. If screws do not enter freely see
that bottom plate is flush with rear of receiver; if not, tap bottom

plate gently on front end until it is flush with rear end of receiver.
Screw plates together and lock with locking screws, making a quarter
turn of these screws to engage grooves in side plate screws. Push
handle into hole in rear of receiver and lock with handle lock. Handle
lock is placed in position by inserting large end into hole with the
stem held upward and then turned toward front and downward to
have projection engage locking cut in side plate and until handle lock
stop springs over stem. Place gun in mount and run a few cartridges
in a belt through gun to see that mechanism works properly. Keep
hand away from trigger during this latter operation, and be sure to
work gas lever until all cartridges are out of gun.

LIST OF PARTS.
1. Handle.
2. Handle lock.
3. Handle lock and safety stop.
4. Handle lock and safety stop spring.
5. Handle lock and safety stop screw.
6. Hammer.
7. Mainspring.
8. Trigger.
9. Trigger spring.
10. Sear.
11. Sear spring.
12. Trigger and sear pin.
13. Bolt.
14. Bolt pin.
15. Shell extractor.
16. Shell extractor spring.
17. Shell extractor pin.
18. Firing pin.
19. Firing-pin spring.
20. Firing-pin stop pin.
21. Carrier.
22. Carrier pin.
23. Carrier dog.
24. Carrier-dog pin.

25. Carrier-dog spring.
26. Carrier-dog plunger.
27. Gas cylinder.
28. Gas-cylinder pin.
29. Gas lever.
30. Gas-lever pin.
31. Gas-lever connection.
32. Gas-lever connection pin.
33. Gas-lever bracket.
34. Gas-lever bracket pin.
35. Gas-lever piston.
36. Gas-lever piston-pin.
36A. Gas-lever piston-pin cotter pin.
37– Retracting springs.
38.
Retracting-spring tube, R. H.
39.
Retracting-spring tube, L. H.
40.
Retracting-spring follower.
41–
Retracting-spring tube screws.
42.
Retracting connection.
43–
44. Retracting-connection pin.
45. Retracting-connection long link.
46. Retracting-connection long link rivet.
47. Retracting-connection short link.
48. Retracting-connection short link rivet.
49. Stock, R. H., with escutcheon.
51. Stock, L. H., with escutcheon.
Stock screw.

52. Front side plate screw.
53. Front side plate screw, Lock screw.
54. Rear side plate screw.
55. Safety.
56. Belt guide.
57. Belt guide screw.
58. Feed-wheel and bushing.
59. Feed-wheel shaft.
60. Feed-wheel dog.
61. Feed-wheel dog screw.
62. Feed-wheel dog spring.
63. Feed lever.
64. Feed lever screw.
65. Feed throw-off.
66. Feed throw-off spring.
67. Feed throw-off screw.
68. Ratchet lever.
69. Ratchet-lever screw.
70. Ratchet-lever pawl.
71. Ratchet-lever pawl spring.
72. Ratchet-lever pawl pin.
73. Ejector.
74. Chamber guide.
75. Bullet guide.
76. Bullet-guide screw.
77. Cartridge guide, R. H.
78. Cartridge guide, L. H.

79. Cartridge extractor.
80. Cartridge-extractor pin.
81. Cartridge-extractor spring.
82. Trip.
83. Slide.
84. Slide pin.
85. Receiver.
86. Side plate, R. H.
87. Side plate, L. H.
88. Bottom plate.
89. Barrel.
90. Front sight.
91. Rear sight.
92. Barrel lock.
93. Barrel-lock pin.
94. Combination wrench.
A.
A1.
C.

Hotchkiss Portable Machine Gun.

COMPONENT PARTS.
1. Barrel.
Assembled—
Trunnion ring.
Gas nozzle ring.
Orifice screw.
Gas cylinder support.
Front sight carrier.
Front sight.
2. Regulator.
3. Receiver.
Assembled—
Bottom plate.
Front feed guide.
Rear feed guide.
Cartridge base stop.
Feed piece cover.
Closing spring.
Rear sight base.
Rear sight screw.
4. Hand guard.
Assembled—
Catches for legs.
Catch springs.

5. Locking nut.
6. Locking screw.
7. Cocking handle.
8. Guard with stock.
Assembled—
Recoil spring seat.
Hinged strap.
Elevating screw tube.
Elevating screw slide.
Slide spring.
9. Barrel rest.
10. Elevating mechanism.
Assembled—
Outer screw.
Inner screw.
Base.
11. Piston.
12. Fermeture nut.
13. Breech block.
14. Extractor.
15. Firing pin.
16. Ejector.
17. Ejector cap.
18. Cartridge stop.
19. Cartridge stop holder.
20. Sear.
21. Trigger.

22. Feed piece.
23. Feed spring.
24. Recoil spring.
25. Ejector spring.
26. Sear spring.
27. Cartridge stop spring.
28. Extractor spring.
Plate X.
Infantry Model with Elevating Gear.

Plate XI.
External Parts.

Plate XII.
Working Parts.

ACCESSORIES.
One dismounting wrench.
One ejector key.
One hand extractor.
One cleaning rod complete.
Two wire brushes.
One cleaning brush.
One gas cylinder cleaner.
One oil can.
One front sight cover.

GENERAL DESCRIPTION.
The gun comprises a single barrel, receiver, guard and stock,
rigidly assembled. Guided in the receiver, parallel to and below the
barrel, is the piston, which by its reciprocating motion assures the
automatic action of the gun. This reciprocating motion is brought
about as follows:—When the bullet in its passage through the bore
has passed a port connecting the bore with the gas nozzle, a small
portion of the powder gas issues from the nozzle, and impinging in
the cup-shaped forward extremity of the piston, throws in the rear.
The recoil spring compressed by the piston in its rearward
movement now returns the piston to its initial position.
In its movement to the rear the piston, which is accompanied by
the breech block, opens the breech, extracts and ejects the spent
cartridge case, and brings a fresh cartridge to the loading position. In
its forward movement the breech is locked and the shot fired.
Feed.
The cartridges are fed into the gun on flat, tempered steel strips, of
30 rounds each.
A folding barrel rest is provided for steadying the barrel when
firing in the prone position which will ordinarily be taken.
For aircraft the gun is mounted on a crutch, and the stock may
be replaced by a pistol grip.
The operation of the gun requires but one man, who loads and
fires. If a second operator loads the speed of fire is increased from
250 to 400 rounds per minute.

ACTION OF THE MECHANISM
To load, the breech must be opened by means of the cocking
handle. As the piston is drawn back, cams on its upper face turn the
fermeture nut a partial revolution, disengaging its interrupted
threads from corresponding threads on the nose of breech block.
This unlocks the breech. Under the action of its spring, the feed piece
engages with a shoulder on the piston and locks it in its rearmost
position.
To permit the introduction of the feed strip, the feed piece must be
lifted to its highest position by pressing up on its lower end. This
frees it from the shoulder of the piston, which latter moves forward
slightly under the action of its spring and engages with the sear. The
feed strip may now be introduced into the guides, cartridge side
down, and should be pushed forward until the pawl forming part of
the feed spring engages with it, so as to prevent any backward
movement.
When the trigger is pulled, the piston, accompanied by the breech
block, is propelled forward by the recoil spring; the breech block
pushes a cartridge from the feed strip into the chamber; the cams on
the upper face of the piston act on the fermeture nut, locking the
breech; the firing pin is driven against the primer and the shot fired.
When the bullet in its passage through the bore has passed the
port leading to the gas nozzle, a small portion of the powder gas,
conducted by the port and the gas nozzle, impinges in the cup-
shaped forward extremity of the piston, and drives it to the rear. As
already explained, the breech is now unlocked by the action of the
piston cams on the fermeture nut, the breech block is withdrawn,
along with the extractor holding the spent cartridge case, which later
is ejected when its head strikes the ejector.
Towards the end of the backward stroke of the piston a cam on its
side imparts a slight rotary movement to the feed piece, which
advances the feed strip sufficiently to bring the following cartridge to
the loading position.

The last cartridge having been fired, the strip is ejected from the
gun. Under the action of its spring, the feed piece, which has been
held up by the strip, now descends, and, engaging with the shoulder
of the piston, locks the breech open. All is now ready for the
introduction of another strip.
The firing gear may be set for continuous firing, single shots, or
safety, by turning the cocking handle to the positions marked “A,”
“R” and “S,” respectively.
When set at “A” (automatic), so long as the trigger is held back, the
piston is free to move forward again under the action of the recoil
spring. As a result the gun fires continuously until the strip is
exhausted or the trigger released.
When set at “R” (repetition), a separate pull of the trigger is
required for each shot, as the sear engages with the piston each time
the latter recoils, thus stopping the firing.
When set at “S” (safety) the trigger is locked, and cannot be pulled
back. As a result the gun cannot be fired.

TO STRIP AND ASSEMBLE THE GUN.
1st.—Close breech.
(a) Lift feed piece to its highest position by pressing up on its
lower end as for loading. This releases shoulder of piston
from feed piece and allows it to move forward slightly
and rest on the sear.
(b) Pull trigger, cocking handle being set at “R” or “A.” As this
releases sear, the piston is propelled forward by recoil
spring and breech closed as when firing.
2nd.—Remove cocking handle.
(a) Throw cocking handle knob to left, slightly past vertical and
against stop.
(b) Draw cocking handle back about ½ inch and then throw
knob to right as far as possible to an angle of about 45
degrees. By this movement cocking handle is released
from piston.
(c) Withdraw cocking handle to rear.
3rd.—Remove guard.
(a) Unscrew locking screws on left side of receiver three turns.
(b) Grasp receiver firmly with left hand and stock or pistol grip
with the right. Push stock forward about ⅜ inch and
then bring it straight down, separating it from receiver.
This combined movement will be learned after a few
trials.
Firing gear (sear, sear spring and trigger) remains with
guard.
4th.—Withdraw recoil spring from receiver.
5th.—Remove recoiling mechanism.

(a) Insert cocking handle in piston and push it forward as far
as it will go, knob inclined at about 45 degrees to right.
When home, turn knob to vertical position so as to
engage lugs at forward end with piston.
(b) Draw cocking handle to rear, and with it the piston, breech
block, extractor and firing pin.
6th.—Remove feed spring.
(a) Disengage feed spring from button at top of feed piece,
springing it up with forefinger of right hand by means of
the hooked portion projecting to rear.
(b) Dismount feed spring by pushing it to rear with left hand
by means of knurled button, at the same time springing it
up sufficiently with right hand to clear pawl from rear
feed guide.
7th.—Remove feed piece.
(a) Throw open feed piece cover by means of knurled knob.
(b) Lift leaf of rear sight.
(c) Lift feed piece to its highest position and turn through an
angle of 180 degrees so that lever points to rear. As
flattened portion of axis is now opposite corresponding
slot in upper bearing, feed piece may be removed to rear.
8th.—Remove ejector.
(a) By means of key unscrew ejector cap and remove it.
(b) Lift out ejector spring and then ejector.
9th.—Remove barrel.
(a) Unscrew barrel locking nut one-sixth of a turn to a stop
with right hand, using dismounting wrench.
(b) Remove barrel by drawing it straight to front.
10th.—Remove hand guard.

(a) Turn locking nut to left sufficiently to free its stud from
engagement with hand guard. (This stud serves to hold
hand guard in place while barrel is being mounted or
dismounted.)
(b) Remove hand guard by drawing it to front.
11th.—Unscrew and remove locking nut.
12th.—Remove fermeture nut.
13th.—Remove firing pin.
Reverse breech block and firing pin will fall into the hand.
14th.—Remove extractor.
(a) Grasp breech block with left hand and hand extractor
with right; insert hook portion of latter between last and
before last coil of extractor spring, compress the spring,
tilt the end out of its seat and remove it.
(b) By holding breech block upwards, extractor will fall out.
15th.—Remove firing gear from guard.
(a) Hold stock between knees, the guard to the front.
(b) With right hand lift hooked arm of trigger sufficiently to
clear it entirely from vertical lever of sear.
(c) With left hand catch knurled button forming outer
extremity of sear axis and draw to left sufficiently to free
right hand end of axis from its pocket. Now lift sear
vertically from guard.
(d) Lift trigger upward and forward, separating it and sear with
spring attached from guard.
(e) Detach respective ends of spring from sear and trigger.
16th.—Remove cartridge stop.
(a) Unscrew cartridge stop holder by means of the
dismounting wrench.

(b) Withdraw cartridge stop spring and cartridge stop.

ASSEMBLING.
1st.—Mount in order the following parts: fermeture nut, barrel nut,
hand guard, barrel, ejector, spring and cap, feed piece, feed piece
spring.
2nd.—Assemble the trigger, sear and sear spring, and then mount
them in guard.
3rd.—Mount the recoiling parts in receiver.
(a) Assemble extractor with breech block.
(b) Mount the firing pin, bringing it to its rearmost position
and turning head to left behind shoulder in breech block.
(c) Engage piston tang in the under slot of breech block. (Rear
face of tang should abut against the rear wall of slot, and
under tang of firing pin should engage in corresponding
groove in piston tang.)
(d) Turn fermeture nut to the open position by passing first
finger of left hand in ejection slot of receiver. (When in
the open position the ejection slot in the fermeture nut
coincides with the ejection slot in the receiver.)
(e) With the right hand grasp rear of piston assembled with
breech block, placing thumb on head of firing pin so as to
hold it turned to left behind shoulder of breech block.
(f) Insert piston assembled with breech block in rear of
receiver and push it forward with right hand until it
comes to a stop. (Its rear face will now be about 1½ inch
in front of rear of receiver.)
N. B.—It is imperative that the head of firing pin be turned
completely to the left, and that fermeture nut be at the
open position. The mechanism should slip into place
easily, forcing being neither necessary nor permissible.
(g)

While pressing on the lower end of feed piece with the right
hand so as to bring it to its highest position, push
forward piston with left hand until breech is closed.
4th.—Insert recoil spring in piston and push forward, allowing a
few inches to project to rear of receiver.
5th.—Mount guard.
(a) Grasp pistol grip with right hand as for firing, making sure
that firing gear is properly mounted by pulling trigger
several times.
(b) Engage projecting end of recoil spring in its seat in the
guard.
(c) Bring the guard to a position under receiver so that the two
lugs on its head are opposite their mortises in rear of
receiver, the trunnions at the front being below and
slightly in advance of their sockets in the bottom of
receiver. In order that the end of recoil spring remains
engaged in its seat in the guard it may be held in place by
means of the end of the cocking handle shank.
(d) Engage lugs in their mortises and trunnions in their sockets
by raising guard vertically.
(e) Draw guard to rear until solidly seated in receiver.
(f) Screw up locking screw.
6th.—Mount cocking handle.
(a) Insert shank of cocking handle in opening in guard, the
knob inclined at 45 degrees to right, and push forward to
a stop.
(b) Throw knob to left to a stop.
(c) Push cocking handle forward until home, and then throw
knob to right and down as far as it will go.

In order to replace a defective extractor or firing pin
proceed as follows:—
1st.— Close breech.
2nd. Remove cocking handle.
—
Remove guard.
3rd.
Withdraw recoil spring.
—
Remove recoiling mechanism.
4th.
— Replace defective part by a spare, and mount by reversing
operations.
5th.
—
The extractor and extractor spring can also be removed without
stripping gun as follows:—
1st.— Insert an empty cartridge case in the ejection slot,
perpendicular to chamber.
2nd. Close breech gently, i. e., by holding it back with cocking
— handle, on to empty cartridge case, thus giving access to
extractor and extractor spring.
3rd. Remove extractor spring and extractor by means of hand
— extractor.
Replace defective part by a spare, cock the gun and withdraw
empty cartridge case.

POINTS TO BE ATTENDED TO BEFORE
FIRING.
1. Cock gun.
2. Pass cleaning rod down the bore to make sure that barrel is
clear.
3. See that regulators of all available barrels are properly set.
4. Oil mechanism. A moderate quantity of oil will suffice. It is
useless to flood the mechanism. As the essential parts are sufficiently
accessible through the ejection slot and by opening the feed piece
cover, dismounting is not necessary.
5. Test action of both ejector and cartridge stop by pushing on
their points. They should work freely, their springs being elastic but
without stiffness.
6. Test action of mechanism by rapidly opening and closing breech
several times. It should work freely and smoothly.

OPERATING THE GUN.
In firing, the prone position will be taken ordinarily, the barrel rest
being used to steady the gun.
In high grass or under conditions where more height is desirable,
ammunition boxes may be placed under the barrel rest so as to
increase height.
In short, any sort of rest available may be used, for instance, the
top of a parapet or the limb of a tree.
In going into action the following operations must be performed:—
(1) Set barrel rest.
(a) Free legs from their catches.
(b) Turn legs forward until at right angles to barrel.
(c) Open legs with a sharp movement such that the separators
catch in one another.
(d) Place the feet in desired position and force points into the
ground.
(2) Mount elevating mechanism.
(a) Place elevating mechanism foot on ground in such position
that it is at right angles to axis of gun.
(b) Bring gun to approximately the required elevation by
turning outer elevating screw.
(3) Take firing position.
(a) Take prone position, resting on the elbows.
(b) Grasp pistol grip and trigger with right hand, pressing
stock well into hollow of right shoulder.
(c) Grasp outer elevating screw with left hand.
(d)

In case elevating gear is not used, left hand grasps stock to
rear of receiver and pulls shoulder strap down solidly
against shoulder.
(4) Cock gun.
(a) Throw cocking handle knob to left to a stop.
(b) Draw cocking handle to rear as far as possible with a sharp
quick movement.
(c) Return cocking handle to its original position, and set at
“R” for single shots, “A” for automatic and “S” for safety.
(5) Loading is ordinarily performed by a second operator, who
takes the prone position to the right of gun, with ammunition
conveniently at hand.
(a) Raise feed piece to its uppermost position by pushing up on
its lower extremity with left hand, placing thumb on feed
piece cover.
(b) With right hand introduce a feed strip into guides, cartridge
side down, and push home until the pawl catches.
N. B.—If gun is operated by but one man, loading will be found
more convenient if the elevating mechanism is not used; the firer
performs both operations of lifting the feed piece and introducing the
strip with the right hand, the left hand meanwhile steadying the gun
by grasping the stock.
(6) Firing.—The gun is fired by pulling the trigger.
(a) Single shots: Set cocking handle at “R” (repetition). One
shot is fired each time trigger is pulled.
(b) Automatic firing: Set cocking handle at “A” (automatic). If
trigger is held back the entire strip of 30 rounds is fired
automatically.
(c) Volley firing: Set cocking handle at “A” (automatic). The
trigger may be released after some 3, 5, or 10 rounds, as
circumstances require, aim quickly altered and firing

resumed, i. e., the strip of 30 rounds is fired in volleys, as
required.
(d) Safety: Set cocking handle at “S” (safety) and remove strip,
unless firing is to be promptly resumed.
N. B.—The trigger must be released at the end of each strip, so that
the sear will hold the piston at the cocked position during the
introduction of the following strip. Otherwise, as soon as the feed
piece is raised preparatory to loading the breech will close,
necessitating recocking the gun before continuous firing.
(7) Unloading.—In order to remove a partially spent strip, proceed
as follows:—
(a) See that breech is open, cocking if necessary.
(b) Hold claw of pawl free from strip by pushing upon lower
extremity of feed piece with left hand while withdrawing
strip with right.
N. B.—As a live cartridge never remains in the chamber the mere
presence or absence of the strip shows whether the gun is loaded.

RAPID CHANGE OF BARREL IN THE FIELD.
In prolonged firing it is sometimes desirable to replace a hot barrel
by a fresh one, so as to allow the former to cool.
This operation, which is performed without dismounting any part
of the mechanism, requires some 10 to 15 seconds.
Proceed as follows:—
Suppose the gun in the firing position.
The firer unscrews the locking nut one-sixth of a turn with the
right hand, using the dismounting wrench.
While the second operator grasps the legs of the barrel rest, quite
near the barrel, No. 1 separates the barrel from the receiver by
drawing the latter to the rear.
Resting the butt on the ground No. 1 now mounts the fresh barrel
and pushes it home.
Meanwhile No. 2 handles the hot barrel by means of the barrel
rest, which he then detaches as follows:—
(a) Fold the legs.
(b) Turn the legs forward until in line with the barrel.
(c) Pivot the legs half a turn around the lug of the front sight
carrier, thus permitting the separation.
The fresh barrel being mounted, No. 2 attaches the barrel rest and
resets it.
A hot barrel may be carried by means of dismounting wrench.

COOLING BARREL.
To reduce wear of rifling, the barrel should be kept cool if
circumstances allow.
Water is not harmful, and when available may be copiously applied
to barrel by means of a sponge or rag.
A hot barrel may be dipped in water, but all traces of latter must be
removed from barrel bore and gas cylinder, by blowing through
same, by means of cleaning rod, or by firing two or three loose
cartridges.
Until all water is blown out of gas cylinder, the gas pressure may
be insufficient for ensuring automatic action.

USE OF THE REGULATOR.
In order that the working of the gun may be regular, sufficient
power must be available to ensure complete recoil of the piston. The
amount of power necessary must vary because of insufficient oiling,
dust, or fouling in the mechanism, &c. Then, again, pressure of the
powder gases may vary because of temperature, deteriorated powder,
or badly worn rifling.
The regulator affords means of varying the power which works the
gun. Under normal conditions it should be set at 25.
To test the automatic action, fire several shots with regulator set at
25 and cocking handle at “R,” and observe:—
(a) One shot should be fired at each pull of trigger. If more
than one shot is fired at a time, it shows that piston does
not recoil sufficiently after each shot to catch on sear.
(b) Claw of pawl should catch in the opening in strip at each
shot. If pawl rides on top of strip instead of catching, it
shows that piston does not recoil sufficiently to throw
feed lever through a complete stroke.
(c) The ejection should be regular and energetic.
If these three points are not satisfactory it may be concluded that
there is a lack of power, and regulator should be screwed up from 5
to 10 divisions.
On the other hand, too much power is not desirable, as the
vibration due to the violent action of the mechanism necessarily
affects accuracy.

ACCIDENTAL STOPPAGES IN THE
AUTOMATIC ACTION OF THE GUN.
In case of a jam always proceed as follows:—
(a) Open breech completely by means of cocking handle.
(b) Remove jammed cartridge through ejection slot by using
hand ejector or cleaning rod as the case may be, and see
that chamber is clear.
(c) Withdraw the strip if some remedy is to be applied.
Otherwise push it forward, bringing the next cartridge to
the loading position.

STOPPAGES AND THEIR REMEDIES.
(1) Jam on the first round of a strip.
The strip was probably not pushed completely home before trigger
was pulled. Always push forward strip until pawl catches, so that
both strip and cartridge are positively held in loading position.
(2) Missfire.
Eject defective cartridge by cocking gun, and continue firing.
N. B.—A loose primer falling into the mechanism may cause
repeated missfires. Dismount the piston and breech block so as to
remove primer, which will usually be found either in the piston cams
or in the fermeture nut near the entrance to the chamber.
Missfires may be also due to a weakened recoil spring. In this case
replace the spring with a spare.
(3) Bad introduction.
The cartridge jams at entrance to the chamber when being pushed
forward by breech block. The bullet of the cartridge in question may
have been imperfectly seated due to defective crimping, or the
cartridge insufficiently held by the clips of the feed strip.
In the latter case the strip should be put aside for re-sizing.
Another cause of bad introduction is incomplete feeding due to
lack of power. In this case screw up the regulator 3 to 10 divisions.
(4) Incomplete ejection of the spent cartridge case.
This is due to lack of power. Screw up the regulator 5 to 10
divisions.

CLEANING AND CARE.
This arm requires the same care as the service rifle. It must be kept
clean and free from rust, and all parts lightly oiled. No gritty
substances or emery should be used.
As soon after firing as practicable the barrel should be thoroughly
cleaned and oiled, particular attention being paid to the chamber.
The gas cylinder should be kept free from fouling by means of the
cleaner so that the regulator can be easily screwed up without using
the dismounting wrench.
When the gun is not in use the breech should be kept closed so as
to avoid weakening the recoil spring.

FEED STRIPS.
The feed strips hold 30 rounds each. There are three rows of clips
which hold the cartridge near the base, the middle and at the neck. A
stop lug which catches behind the head of the cartridge case prevents
longitudinal motion.

FEED STRIP FILLING MACHINE.
The feed strip filling machine is constructed for clamping to a
bench or plank, as, for instance, the lid of a cartridge box.
The hopper and clamp are removable for compactness in packing.
The machine must be so placed that the crank can be conveniently
turned with the right hand.
Proceed as follows:—
(a) Fill the hopper with cartridges.
(b) Push a feed strip, stop lugs to the rear, in its guides on the
machine until the feed tooth catches back of the first
middle clip.
(c) Turn the crank. At each complete turn of the crank first a
cartridge is pushed forward into the clips, and then the
feed strip fed ahead one notch into position for the
succeeding cartridge.
(d) When filled remove the feed strip.
This machine is operated most efficiently by two men. One
supplies the machine with feed strips, turns the crank, and removes
filled feed strips; the other supplies the hopper with cartridges.
N. B.—The feed strips may also be readily filled by hand; care
should be taken that the rims of all cartridges bear back against their
stop lugs.

RE-SIZING THE FEED STRIPS.
When the feed strips have been used repeatedly, the middle clips
sometimes lose their curvature to such an extent that the cartridges
are not firmly held. This is quickly remedied by passing the strips
through the re-sizing tool so as to restore the middle clips to their
original form.
As a rule, very little re-sizing is necessary, slight contact between
the re-sizing roller and the top of the middle clip sufficing.

General.

DUTIES.
(Referring mainly to the Maxim and Vickers’
Guns.)
Section Officer.
To command his section in accordance with orders and the tactical
situation.
To select gun positions.
To observe and control fire.
To give instructions to range taker.
To act, when brigaded, under instructions of the B. M. G. O.
Sergeant.
Supervise guns coming into action as the section officer will direct.
Be prepared to take command in the event of the officer becoming
a casualty; in fact, act as the officer’s understudy.
Corporal.
Responsible for packing, and contents of limbered wagon·
On the march he will be in rear of it and work brake as required.
Superintend unpacking, and take command in the absence of
officer and sergeant.
See that rifles and packs of Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 4 are put into wagon.
Have spare parts box handy.
Supervise ammunition supply and belt filling.
Direct limbered wagons as required.

Superintend filling of sandbags and cutting of brushwood.
Watch for signals from section officer.
Take place of sergeant in the event of him becoming a casualty.
No. 1 Firer.
Will personally clean and look after his gun.
Carry tripod into action, place it in position and assist No. 2 in
mounting.
Repeat all orders received.
Observe his own fire.
No. 2.
Assists No. 1 at the gun, carries it into action and mounts it with
the assistance of No. 1.
Attends to the feeding.
Watch for signals from the section officer.
Nos. 3 and 4.
Ammunition carriers.
No. 3 takes first supply to the gun assisted by No. 4 and arranges
that spare parts wallet is brought up to gun position.
He is also responsible that the condenser is in position before
water boils.
No. 4 takes ammunition from limber to No. 3 when a further
supply is required.
Takes condenser complete, and half filled with water to No. 3.
No. 5—Scout.

Acts as ordered by section officer.
No. 6—Range taker.
Takes ranges and prepares range cards.
The other No. 6, is a spare man and acts according to orders from
his officer.
Drivers.
Remain with wagons and must act on signal from the officer. They
should be taught to fill belts by hand or machine and to act as
ammunition carriers.

SECTION DRILL (WITH TRANSPORT).
Drill with Limbered Wagons.
The detachment will be formed up in two ranks six paces in rear of
the wagon, facing outwards.
On the command or signal “Action,” the driver dismounts and
stands to his horses. The sergeant and Nos. 5 and 6 double out to the
section officer. The corporal lowers the tail-board and superintends
the unpacking. The remaining numbers ground arms on the word of
command of the senior number, and fall out to the wagon to perform
the duties detailed above.
The corporal selects a suitable covered position for the limbered
wagon, if necessary.
On the command or signal “Dismount guns,” the procedure for
unpacking is reversed, and when completed, detachments fall in and
take up arms by word of command.
Drill with Pack Transport.
Normally mules will be led by Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7 and 8.
On the command “Prepare for action,” Nos. 2, 3, 7 and 8 will link
their mules to those immediately in front of them.
Nos. 7 and 8 will lead Nos. 1 and 4 mules. Nos. 1 and 2 will march
on the tripod and gun sides respectively of No. 1 mule and loosen
straps. Nos. 3 and 4 will march on either side of No. 2 mule.
On the command or signal “Action,” No. 1 will off-load the tripod
and No. 2 the gun; No. 3 will off-load the leading ammunition
animal.
The corporal will select a suitable covered position for the pack
animals. The other duties of the various numbers are as on pages.

On the command or signal “Stand to,” Nos. 1, 2 and 3 will reverse
the actions of off-loading. The detachment will then form up for
marching.

SECTION DRILL (WITHOUT TRANSPORT).
Guns, tripods and ammunition boxes will be placed on the ground,
muzzles to the front and in line, legs to rear, straps round rear legs
buckled, clamps sufficiently tight to prevent legs from hanging loose
when tripod is lifted. Traversing clamp sufficiently loose to enable
gun to be deflected by a sharp tap with the hand on rear crosspiece,
guns on right and not closer to each other than eight paces,
ammunition boxes three paces in rear.
Fall in.—Detachment for the two guns will “fall in” in two ranks,
five paces in front of the interval between guns, sergeant on left of
front rank, corporal covering him in rear.
Front rank will be right gun detachment.
Rear rank will be left gun detachment.
Number.—As in squad drill.
Take Post.—Detachments turn outwards and double to their
respective guns (sergeant and corporal on outer flanks, where they
can superintend). Nos. 1 and 2 fall in on left of tripod; No. 3 on left of
ammunition box. (If ground suitable these numbers should lie
down.)
Nos. 4, 5 and 6 fall in, in single rank, in rear of No. 3.
The gun position and point of aim is then indicated, followed by
command:—
Mount Gun.—No. 1 picks up tripod, having previously seen that
both elevating screws are exposed the same distance, carries and
places it in position indicated. In adjusting, he must ensure that
crosshead and sights are upright, and legs clamped tight. No. 2
should so time his advance that he will arrive immediately the tripod
is adjusted. He will carry gun to right side of tripod, holding rear
crosspiece with left hand, gun muzzle to rear under right arm. Kneels
on left knee, facing tripod, and supporting weight of gun on right
knee, places it on tripod, drives in and turns down crosshead joint
pin, and removes cork plug from steam escape hole.
No. 1 fixes elevating joint pin and directs gun towards the mark.

No. 2 kneeling and placing ammunition box in position.
No. 3 when he sees gun nearly mounted, will carry ammunition
box forward and place it within reach of No. 2. He then retires to a
position not immediately in rear of the gun.
Load.—No. 1 raises tangent sight, No. 2 passes tag of belt through
feed block. No. 1 turns crank handle on to buffer spring, pulls belt to
left front as far as it will go, and lets go crank handle, releases strain
on belt, then turns crank handle on to buffer spring, again pulls belt
to left front and lets go belt and crank handle. The gun is now ready
to fire.
Single Shot Loading.—Carry out first half of loading motions,
then, without touching belt, turn crank handle on to buffer spring
and let go.
800 (Range).—No. 1 repeats the order and adjusts slide to
elevation required.
At (Object).—No. 2 adjusts traversing clamp if ordered to by No.
1, who lays the gun, raises automatic safety catch with forefinger and
prepares to fire.
When No. 1 is ready No. 2 holds up his hand.
Fire.—No. 1 presses the double button.
Cease Fire.—No. 1 releases automatic safety catch and remains
steady.
Traversing Fire.—No. 1 will lay gun on flank named, press
button, and tap alternately, with the hand, on the rear crosspiece in
the required direction, until limit is reached.
Unload.—No. 1 lowers the sight (not the slide), turns the crank
handle twice in succession on to buffer spring, letting it fly back each
time on to the check lever; then presses up finger pieces on bottom
pawls, No. 2 withdrawing and repacking belt in box. No. 1 clears
ejector tube and lock, and releases lock spring by pressing double
button.
Dismount Gun.—No. 1 removes crosshead and elevating joint
pins. No. 2 replaces cork plug, passes ammunition box to No. 3, and
removes gun to its original position in rear, No. 1 following with
tripod, joint pins will then be pushed home, legs folded and clamped.

Prone Position.
Mount Gun.—No. 1 crawls into position, pushing tripod forward
with right hand, having first adjusted front legs by turning it over
and moving legs round so that they remain in a slightly backward
position over the elevating wheel.
When in the position ordered for mounting, he turns legs down
and adjusts so as to secure a low, upright position of the crosshead.
No. 2 will then move into position, on his back, carrying the gun
across his body, muzzle to the front. On reaching tripod he will push
muzzle towards No. 1 who will assist in mounting, and insert
crosshead joint pin, No. 2 inserting elevating joint pin and removing
cork plug.
No. 1 will then turn into position for firing, supporting himself
against the legs of No. 2.
Adjust sights, load, and fire as ordered.
Out of Action.—No. 1 will unload, Nos. 1 and 2 (in prone
position) will take hold of rear leg (No. 1 with right hand, No, 2 with
left), and draw gun out of action until under cover, when gun will be
dismounted in the usual manner; No. 2 having drawn ammunition
box back with the gun.

TESTS OF ELEMENTARY TRAINING.
No. of Nature of Test, with Standard Remarks.
Test. Commands. Time.
I. To erect tripod and 20 sec.
mount gun. “Mount
Gun.”
II. To load the gun. 5 sec. All motions distinct. No
“Load.” slurring.
III. To adjust sights and lay 12 sec. From range being ordered
gun “At... (Range)... until No. 2 holds up his
Object...” hand.
IV. To unload the gun. 5 sec. Motions distinct, belt
“Unload.” correctly repacked,
Lockspring released.
V. To dismount the gun. 15 sec. All points as at beginning of
“Dismount Gun.” Test I., and cork plug
replaced.
VI. To bring gun into 40 sec. All points for Tests I., II. and
action (Range... III. to be fulfilled. Time
Object...) “Action.” taken until No. 2 holds up
his hand.
VII. Horizontal Traversing 3 sec. for each
(Limits of Traverse). complete
“Traversing Fire.” series.
VIII. Diagonal Traversing 4 sec. for each
(Limits of Traverse). series.
“Traversing Fire.”
IX. Rectifying Stoppages. Correct Correct remedy applied and
“Gun Stops.” procedure gun relaid after remedy.
begun, 3 sec.
X. Belt Filling. 1 min. 25 rounds.[1]
12 min. 250 rounds.[1]
1. Placed in a heap. Pass for inspection when filled.

CHARACTERISTICS OF MACHINE GUN.
The fact that the gun is mounted upon a platform and the personal
factor thus reduced, results in a close grouping of fire, and practically
the same results are obtained in war as in peace, the beaten zone
being about half the area of that of rifle fire. This gives the following
advantages:—
Surprise effect.
Observation of fire for ranging.
Overhead covering fire.
Other advantages of the machine gun are:—
Narrow frontage (a machine gun only occupying the same
frontage as two infantrymen).
Difficult to locate.
Normal rate of fire about 500 rounds per minute. All-round
traverse, which allows gun to be turned in any direction
without moving tripod, and with little exposure.
Mobility: It can go wherever a man can go on foot.
It has, however, the following drawbacks:—
Overheating, and consequent stoppage through too prolonged
fire.
Noise of firing, and steam from barrel casing reveals position.
Narrow and scattered objects are unsuitable targets.
It will be seen therefore that the machine gun is a
weapon of opportunity particularly adapted for surprise
effect, but not for sustained fire action.

FIRE DIRECTION.
The following methods should be used:—
Ranging Fire.
Bursts of fire limited to from 10 to 20 rounds.
It is unlikely that observation will be obtained with larger bursts.
Rapid Fire.
In groups of from 30 to 50 rounds, the firer pausing slightly
between each group to confirm the alignment of sights.
Traversing Fire.
Distributed laterally, and applied in a series of small groups, the
object being to cover as wide a front as possible, with a minimum of
volume. (Groups should consist of from 5 to 10 rounds only.) A belt
of 250 rounds should cover a frontage of 25 yards in one minute.
Swinging Traverse.
For trench warfare, and against dense targets at close ranges, the
traversing clamp being kept fairly loose and the gun traversed evenly
and smoothly from side to side, both hands retaining their hold on
the traversing handles.
Combined Sights.

When two or more guns are working together, the depth of the
effective zone can be increased by ordering different elevations for
each gun, both, however, using the same point of aim.
The respective depth and width of effective zones may be taken as
being:—
Range. Mark VI. Mark VII.
Depth. Width. Depth. Width.
Yards. Yards. Feet. Yards. Feet inches.
500 150 4 220 2 6
1,000 70 8 140 5 0
1,500 60 13 70 10 0
2,000 50 19 60 17 6
From this it is apparent that, allowing an error of 10 per cent. in
ascertaining the range, the flatness of trajectory within 800 yards
will insure the target being included in the effective zone, therefore
with Mark VII ammunition combined sights should not be used at
less than 800 yards.
Bracketing.
When only a section is available and the “combined sights” method
does not give sufficient assurance of fire effect, “bracketing” should
be used as follows:—
The range estimated, probable error determined, and the limits
between which it is necessary to search with fire, the maximum and
minimum elevation will be allotted to right and left gun respectively,
who fire a burst and then work inwards (one higher, one lower) by
altering their respective elevations 50 yards each time, eventually
passing each other. If observation of the fire can be obtained, correct
elevation should be immediately ordered.
With Mark VII ammunition this method would not be necessary at
1,000 yards, as with a 10 per cent. error the “combined sights”
method would give a satisfactory result.
Vertical Searching.

The range to nearest point of objective is taken, sight adjusted and
gun laid on this point.
Sights are then set for the farthest point of the objective. This will
bring the line of sight short of the aiming-point. A series of bursts are
then fired, care being taken that each burst strikes just beyond the
former one, but does not leave any gap between groups.
Overhead Fire.
Can be employed normally from or at a commanding position, or
across a valley, but not when own troops and those of the enemy are
on same plane.
Range of target must be accurate. If 1,000 yards or under, angles
of sight to enemy and own troops must not be less than 30 minutes.
If range is between 1,000 and 1,500 yards, the angle must not be less
than 60 mins.
Overhead fire should not be used at 1,500 yards and over.
The following method of sighting can be used.—
Adjust backsight to correct range of target and lay gun on mark. If
gun is nearer than 900 yards, raise sight by 400 yards, and if further
than 900 yards, raise sight 250 yards.
The new line of sight gives safety angles.
When heads of own troops come into line of sight, cease fire, or
continue to elevate gradually, keeping pace with advance.
Indirect Fire.
Firing from concealed positions at an auxiliary aiming mark.
A machine gun protractor, or graticules cut across the focal plane
of prismatic glasses are most satisfactory. By this means indirect fire
can be applied as easily as direct fire.
Night Firing.

The gun may be laid by day and left until required, or by use of the
“night firing box,” as follows:—
A stick is placed in the ground 10 yards in front of gun in a direct
line with the target, and at night the stick is replaced by the “night
firing box”—the sights altered (but not the gun) until aligned on the
lamp at the point where the lines form the true centre.
Searching and deflection can be satisfactorily carried out with this
apparatus.

EXAMPLES OF FIRE ORDERS.
Normal Fire Order using One Elevation.
Range.
Aiming mark.
Fire (signalled).
Cease fire (signalled).
Changes in elevation (up or down 100), as required.
Combined Sights.
Range and differences.
Aiming mark.
Fire (signalled).
Changes in elevation (left gun up 200, right gun down 200) (or
more, as required).
When Brigaded within Hearing.
The B. M. G. O. issues fire orders direct to the Nos. 1 as above.
When “differences” “by sections” are required the fire order will be
as follows:—
B. M. G. O.
(a) By sections—Range—Differences.
(Pause for section officers to name the number of their
sections and the “range” for their sections; they do not
repeat the “differences.”)
(b) Aiming mark.

(c) Fire.
Traversing Fire.
Range.
Target (naming right and left limits to be traversed).
“Inwards traversing.”
Fire (signalled).
The same method is employed when laying on the centre, the
caution “Outwards traversing” being given.
When brigaded within hearing orders are issued as follows:—
By B. M. G. O.:—
Range.
Limits of traverse.
Fire (signalled).
Section officer repeats limits to be traversed, and immediately
issues orders respecting ground to be traversed by their own
sections, corresponding to their own positions.
Vertical Searching Fire.
Range.
Aiming mark.
To “range” vertical searching.
Fire (signalled).
Bracketing Fire.
Ranges—bracketing.
Aiming mark.
Fire.

SIGNALS.
In many cases observation will be impossible from the gun
position and it will be necessary for observers to signal results from a
flank.
The following semaphore code is used in signalling the results of
observation of fire:—
P— Plus: meaning fire observed at least 50 yards beyond target.
M— Minus: meaning fire observed at least 50 yards short of
target.
T— Right: meaning fire observed to right of target.
C— Centre: meaning direction of fire correct.
U— Unobserved: meaning no observation obtained.
Q— Query: meaning fire observed, but its position uncertain.
R— Range: meaning range correct.
The signaller at the observation post should give the “call up” to
show that the observers are ready. “P” and “M” may be repeated for
multiples of 50 yards; thus, “PP” would mean, “Fire observed at least
100 yards beyond target.” Signals should be repeated from the gun
position if this can be done without disclosing the position to the
enemy.
On all occasions when guns are firing, the following signals should
be used in controlling fire:—
Signal for “Action.”—Both arms fully extended, raised from the
sides to a position in line with the shoulders and lowered again. This
motion to be repeated until it is seen that the signal is being
complied with. Note.—A machine gun is said to be “In Action” when
it is mounted, loaded and laid, but not necessarily firing.
Signal for “Out of Action.” Arm swung in a circular motion in front
of the body.

By No. 2.
Hand up—Gun ready to open fire.
By Controlling Officer.
Hand u— Preparatory to opening fire.
Hand dropped—Open fire.
Elbow close to the side, forearm waved horizontally—Cease fire.

GENERAL MACHINE GUN COURSE.
Extracts from War Office Letter No. 9/General Number/4976
(M. T. 2), dated 14th May, 1915.
1. PERSONNEL.
The following table shows the establishment of the Service
Machine Gun section to be maintained in the following units:—New
Armies, Reserve Units, Territorial Force Units, Colonial Contingents.
Unit. Officers. Sergeants. Corporals. Privates.
New Armies (Infantry
Battalions):—
Service Section 1 2 1 24
Reserve Section[2] 1 2 1 24
Reserve Cavalry Regiments 1 1 1 24
Territorial Force:—
Yeomanry Regiments 1 1 1 24
Infantry Battalions 1 2 1 24
3rd Line Depôts 1 1 1 24
Special and Extra Reserve
Infantry Battalions:— 1 1 1 24
2nd Reserve Infantry
Battalions (supplying 3
Battalions)[3] 1 1 1 24
2nd Reserve Infantry
Battalions (supplying 2
Battalions)[3] 1 1 1 18
2nd Reserve Infantry
Battalions (supplying 1
Battalion)[3] 1 1 1 12
Colonial Contingents:—
Cavalry Regiments 1 1 1 24
Infantry Battalions 1 2 1 24

2. See paragraph 3.
3. Until the Second New Army goes overseas, 2nd Reserve Infantry Battalions
will all be considered as supplying one Battalion for the purposes of this Letter.
In draft producing units, the personnel of machine gunners will
always be maintained; a reserve of men thoroughly trained in
mechanism, drill, etc., must be available to fill the gaps in the service
section caused by drafting.
2. AMMUNITION.
300 rounds (Territorial Force Units, Mark VI., other Units, Mark
VII.) will be fired in the General Machine Gun Course by each
Officer, N. C. O. and man of the existing service section or on his
appointment thereto, as soon as he is fit to fire.
Exceptions:—
(a) Men who have already fired a complete course:
(b) Men who have commenced a course previously approved will
complete such course.
Machine gunners of New Army Battalions, other than 2nd Reserve
Battalions, will not commence the course until authority is given to
do so.
Ammunition allotted to Machine Gun Sections is not to be
expended for rifle firing.

3. GENERAL MACHINE GUN COURSE.

Part I. Rounds
allotted.
Practice 1.— Grouping 10
„ 2.— Single shot, traversing 10
„ 3.— Application 20
„ 4.— Vertical searching 20
„ 5.— (Omitted).
Additional
Practice.— Swinging traverse 30
Repetition 20
110
Part II.
(Range 400 yards for all Practices except Practice 14.)
Time. Rounds
Seconds. allotted.
Practice 7.— Ranging 20
„ 8.— (Omitted).
„ [4]9.— Application 20 30
„ [4]10.— Traversing 50 60
„ 11.— (Omitted).
„ 12.— (Omitted).
„ 13.— Observation 20
„ 14.— Fire at successive positions
(range 600 yds. to 200 yds.) 40
Total 170
Part I. 110
Part II. 170
Surplus for repetition of indifferent shots to be pooled and used
at the discretion of the Commanding Officer 20

Grand total 300
4. Classification practices.
Notes.
Part I.
1. Additional Practice.—For trench warfare, and against dense
targets at close range, the “Swinging Traverse” has been found
necessary. It in no way replaces the method of traversing by
automatic tapping, which should still be considered the normal
method. The swinging traverse is taught by teaching a man to
traverse a machine gun instructional target evenly and smoothly in
about 6 seconds.
Part II.
2. Practice 10.—It will be necessary to shorten the target, as 40
rounds less are allowed for in this practice. This will be done by using
two 10–feet screens instead of three. Spaces will be 20 inches.
3. Practice 13.—(a) If a field firing range is not available Practice
11 will be substituted for this practice.
(b) Observation should be taken by three parties, left, right, and
centre, who should change round after each firer. Section Officers
should ascertain that each man has observed from each position.
4. Practice 14.—10 rounds will be fired at each of the four
distances from 600 yds. to 200 yds. on the lines laid down in
Musketry Regulations. These rounds will be “spaced out” before
commencing the practice, and the firer will proceed to the next range
on completing his 10 rounds, whether he has secured a hit or not.
Classification.
5. Machine gunners will be classified upon the result which they
obtain in Practices 9 and 10, General Machine Gun Course, as
follows:—
To be classified as a “1st Class Gunner” 50 points.

To be classified as a “Qualified Gunner” 25 points.
Points will be allotted in the classification practices on the same
basis of scoring as laid down in paragraph 647, Musketry
Regulations, Part I., 1909 (reprint), 1914.
Preliminary instruction in aiming and firing should be given by
means of a Rifle Attachment.
A very satisfactory one can be obtained at small cost from Messrs.
A. G. Parker&Co., Whittall Street, Birmingham.
The illustration is practically self-explanatory. The large round
clamps fit on the water jacket of the machine gun and the small
clamps hold the rifle, which can be adjusted to hit at exactly the same
mark as the machine gun barrel is aimed at.
The trigger of the rifle is connected to the machine gun by the
adjustable chain device shown.
The apparatus is in constant use at the Schools of Musketry, and is
the invention of Armourer Sergeant-Major Hiscock, of the Motor
Machine Gun Section.

WAR ESTABLISHMENTS OF NEW ARMIES,
1915.
4 Guns.
1 Subaltern.
2 Sergeants.
1 Corporal.
24 Privates.
6 Drivers.
1 Batman.
1 Riding horse.
12 Draught horses.
4 G. S. limbered wagons.
The G. S. limbered wagons contain:—
4 guns with tripods.
7,000 rounds of ammunition in belts, and
4 ammunition pack saddles for lead horses.
1 pick-axe, 1 shovel, and 1 billhook are carried with each machine
gun tripod as part of its equipment. 60 sandbags per infantry
battalion are carried for use with machine guns.

NOTES FROM THE FRONT.
Points to Remember.
Conceal guns and men.
Select best position to achieve the object you hope to achieve.
Have alternative positions prepared.
Provide effective obstacles.
Keep guns and belts free from dirt.
Give out any preparatory orders necessary.
Be always ready to fire when wanted.
Study the ground all round the position.
Remember the value of cross fire.
Keep your fire for the proper moment.
Choice of Gun Positions.
The choice of a gun position must be governed by the following
considerations:—
Enfilade fire, against the enemy and against ourselves.
Overhead fire, to support our own troops.
Long-range fire, against enemy’s supports.
Fire against houses, etc., in rear of enemy’s line.
Fire against likely places for enemy’s machine guns.
Concealment from enemy’s artillery.
Alternative positions.
Lines of advance and retreat.
Covered approach for ammunition carriers, etc.
Facilities for control of guns.
Avoid:—
Obvious positions.
Positions easy to describe. } Either from surroundings
Positions easy to arrange upon. } or maps.
Positions near prominent objects or aiming-points.

Ground which will facilitate observation of fire by the enemy.
Employment of Machine Guns.
The fire of well-concealed machine guns may often be directed
against:—
Windows, doors, roofs, etc., of houses thought to be occupied.
Areas of bush, crops, etc.
Open spaces across which the enemy are dribbling in small
parties in order to concentrate at another point.
The enemy’s firing-line.
It may happen that machine guns are forced to open fire in self-
defence, or to assist the advance of the infantry in spite of the target
offered not being a suitable one for machine guns.
Any tendency, however, to open fire with machine guns without
good reason must be suppressed.
Machine Guns and Artillery.
Every effort must be made to prevent machine guns being located
by artillery.
If guns are shelled they must either:—
Change their Position at once.—This would be the usual
proceeding. A movement of quite a short distance—say 50
yards—is quite sufficient in many cases; or—
Cease fire while detachments take cover until the
shelling stops.—If this be done, the hostile artillery may
think that the machine guns have been put out of action.
Good targets may then present themselves, and the guns may
be able to reopen fire with good effect from the same
position.

There have been several cases of machine guns firing against
artillery with great success. The following instances are
quoted:—
(a) A section of machine guns worked forward to a concealed
position 900 yards away from a German field battery in
action. The section brought oblique fire to bear on the battery
and completely silenced it.
(b) A section took a German field battery in enfilade at 2,400
yards. The battery was firing at the time, the gunners fled
from their guns, and the battery was silenced.
Note.—Frontal fire by machine guns against shielded artillery can
only be expected to produce moral effect. This moral effect may,
however, be considerable; and, in addition, the machine gun fire may
greatly hamper the supply of ammunition to the guns, etc.
The Occupation of Various Positions by Machine Guns.
Barricades.—When barricading roads, bridges, streets, etc.,
machine guns should not be placed on the barricade itself if equally
good effect can be obtained by placing the guns in positions
commanding the approaches to the barricade.
Banks.—The banks of rivers, canals, streams, etc., can be made
use of for gun positions, or covered lines of advance or retreat.
Crops.—Standing crops often form useful cover for guns and
concealed lines of advance, etc.
Ditches.—These can often be used to enable machine guns to be
pushed forward, so as to bring oblique or enfilade fire to bear on the
enemy.
Great care must be taken not to show above the banks of the ditch.

A few men should be pushed along the ditch on the exposed flank
as a protection against snipers, counterattacks, etc.
Houses.—Houses may be used as follows:—
Place the gun in the back of a room, firing through an open
window, or a window from which a few panes of glass have
been removed.
Remove a few tiles from the roof, and fire through the opening
thus made.
Should a house have two doors or two windows, directly
behind one another, the gun may be placed in rear of the
house, and fire through these doors or windows.
Place the gun in rear of the house, so that oblique or enfilade
fire can be brought to bear on the enemy.
If the house possesses a cellar, the gun may be placed in the
cellar, a few bricks being removed, so as to enable the gun to
be fired from the ground-level.
In whatever position the gun is placed some protection should,
if possible, be provided for the numbers, such as an
emplacement of sandbags, stones, bricks, etc.
It should be remembered that if the gun is located in a building by
the enemy’s artillery, it may be necessary to evacuate the building
quickly; arrangements must therefore be made to meet this
contingency.
Folds in the Ground.—Great use can be made of folds in the
ground for the concealment of machine guns.
The gun should be placed so as to enable the bullets to clear the
crest, while the gun and detachment are concealed as much as
possible.
Haystacks.—These can be made use of as follows:—
Hollow out front of haystack.
No. 1 sits in this hollow, with his back against the hay.

The loose hay is piled up in front of the gun.
Cut out a place for the gun on top of the haystack.
If possible, make a rough platform of boards.
The gun then fires over the top of the ridge of the stack.
Place the gun behind the haystack in such a manner that
oblique or enfilade fire may be brought to bear on the enemy.
The gun is then entirely concealed from the front.
This is, as a rule, the best method of using a haystack.
Hedges.—Can often be used as a covered approach and as fire
positions giving cover from view.
A few men should be placed along the hedge, on the exposed flank,
for protection.
Mounds of Earth, Roots, etc.—These may be used as follows:—
Hollow out the mound from the rear, so that the gun can fire
from the hollow while it is concealed from the front.
Planks, sandbags, etc., can be used to support the earth.
Fire over the top of the mound, using the mound as a parapet.
Place the gun behind the mound, using the mound as a cover
from the front, while oblique or enfilade fire is brought to
bear against the enemy.
Stacks of Wood.—The stack may be hollowed out from the rear,
so that the gun can be placed inside the stack, and fire to the front,
while being perfectly concealed from view.
The position can be strengthened by using sandbags inside the
stack.
Stooks of Corn can also be used to provide cover from view.
Trees.—Trees, when in leaf, may be used as possible gun
positions.

Trees with strong branches are necessary, and a platform for the
gun must be built in the branches.
Tree-trunks can also be used to provide cover from view.
Trenches.—When guns are not used in trenches they should,
when possible, be placed so as to bring oblique or enfilade fire
against:—
The enemy’s trenches.
The ground over which the enemy must pass, should he attack.
Our own front line trenches in case the enemy penetrates into
them.
To achieve these objects guns may be placed:—
In a salient.
At the base of a re-entrant.
At the horns of a re-entrant.
At a bend in the trench.
In an emplacement jutting out from the general line of the
trench.
In all cases the gun should, if possible, be covered from fire from
the front, and should be able to sweep the front of the entrenched
line with cross fire.
Thus, although each gun may be firing to its flank, its front is
swept by the fire of a neighbouring gun.
Arrangements should be made so that guns so placed may be able
to fire to their front, should an emergency make this desirable.
This can be done by:—
Arranging that some sandbags can be removed and the gun
fired to the front through the loophole thus made.
In this connection it must be remembered that:—
(a) If the sandbags are left in place for a considerable time
without being removed, they may become embedded and
be found unmovable.

(b) That loopholes filled with single sacks will not be bullet-
proof.
Training the gunners to:—
(a) Remove the gun quickly from the tripod and fire from the
top of parapet without it.
(b) Lift the gun and tripod out of the trench and fire it from
some previously selected spot.
Note.—Both these methods require much practice.
Every endeavour should be made to conceal the position of the gun
from the front.
Gun emplacements must therefore be made to appear exactly like
the remainder of the trench or breastwork.
Several emplacements should be made for each gun, and practice
should be made in moving guns quickly from one emplacement to
another.
Guns may be placed—In the Front Line of Trenches.—This
may be taken as the general rule.
In Support Trenches.—There are occasions when it may be
advisable to place guns in the support trenches.
Here they may be arranged so as to:—
Prevent a further advance of the enemy should they capture
the front line.
Enfilade the front line should it be captured.
Sweep the communication trenches.
In Positions in Rear.—If the ground is favourable it may be
possible to place guns, in concealed positions, in rear of the
entrenched line.
They can be arranged so as to:—
Fire over the trenches and sweep the ground in front.

Fire through gaps in the defensive line.
Command positions where the enemy may concentrate prior to
the assault.
Command positions likely to be occupied by the enemy’s
machine guns.
Command covered approaches on the defensive line.
Enable guns to fire on enemy’s trenches with greater effect.
Give overhead covering fire in case of an advance by our own
troops.
General Notes on Trench Work.
If guns are often used, the positions from which they are fired
should frequently be changed.
Thus the enemy may be deceived as to the number and position of
the guns.
Emplacements should be numbered, and range cards placed in
each.
When taking over a line of trenches the machine gun officer must
make careful arrangements for controlling the fire of his guns.
The machine gun officer must:—
(a) Establish himself at a place where he can always be found.
(b) Keep in touch with his guns with the officers of the line of
trenches he is assisting to defend.
(c) Arrange for ammunition supply.
(d) Arrange for reliefs.
Towers, windmills and other high buildings may often be
used with advantage:—
For overhead fire.
(a) Cover the advance of friendly troops.

(b) Fire at attacking enemy over the heads of our own troops.
(c) Enable fire to be directed into enemy’s trenches.
(d) To direct the fire of guns situated in other positions.
Woods, especially when in leaf, are often most valuable for
concealing the position of guns.
Care must be taken that the guns are not placed too near the edge
of the wood or individual men expose themselves.
All communications between guns should be made in the wood,
well in rear of the guns.
Alternative positions should be selected, so that the guns may be
moved rapidly from one to another if desired, with as little loss of
time as possible.
Lines of retirement through the woods must be arranged and also
lines of communication between guns and limbers thought out.
Machine Guns in Action.
The Attack.—The guns should be dug in whenever it is possible
to do so without giving away their position.
It is often impossible to see anything of the enemy. Therefore
likely positions for him to occupy must be looked for.
Surprise, obtained by a concealed advance, is essential to the
successful handling of machine guns.
The progress of the infantry must be carefully watched, with a view
to pushing on a certain number of guns and to closely support them
whenever possible.
The usual methods of supporting the infantry attack will be:—
(a) Fire from the flanks.
(b) Overhead fire.
(c) Long-range searching fire.
(d) Fire from a forward position.

Every opportunity for the use of overhead fire should be seized.
All suitable ground, buildings, etc., that may enable this kind of
fire to be used should be looked for.
The enemy’s machine guns are the weapons that are most likely to
hold up the attack.
Therefore every effort should be made to locate them, and to
concentrate the fire of our own machine guns upon them.
It may sometimes be possible to use machine guns to search
systematically all places in the area of attack likely to be held by the
enemy.
This searching fire has undoubtedly considerable moral effect on
the troops subjected to it, and may greatly assist the subsequent
infantry advance. It requires, however, a large expenditure of
ammunition.
If the preliminary reconnaissance is properly carried out, it is quite
possible for the guns employed for this purpose to remain
undetected, even though pushed well forward.
The general rules as to position of machine guns in attack are as
follows:—
(a) The fire of a large proportion of the available guns should
be carefully organized to cover the infantry advance.
(b) This covering fire is no longer possible, move up a
proportion of the available guns either into, or on to, the
flanks of the infantry firing-line.
(c) A proportion of the guns should usually be held back as a
reserve in the hands of the commander.
(d) Thus each gun has a definite duty to perform, and co-
operation between guns is assured.
It may be possible, and advantageous, to move forward a
proportion of the guns with the attacking lines of the infantry.
The guns allotted to this duty will not take part in the covering fire,
but will keep themselves fresh and their ammunition intact, in
readiness for the advance.
Their duties will be to:—

(a) Help the infantry to gain fire superiority at the decisive
point.
(b) Make good and hold positions won.
(c) Pursue the enemy by fire.
(d) Watch for and repel counterattacks.
(e) Enable the infantry to re-organize.
As enemy snipers are a particular source of annoyance to machine
gunners, they should be watched for.
The defence of prepared positions has been already dealt with
under the heading of Machine Guns in Trenches.
Machine guns in any defensive position must be so organized that
they can support each other mutually throughout any given section
of the defensive line.
It must be remembered that the best positions for machine guns
are not always the same by night and day.
It will often be necessary to move the guns from the night position
to the day position before dawn.
Rearguard Action.—The following points must be considered:—
A wide field of fire.
Guns must be carefully concealed in the least obvious places.
Covered lines of retreat must be carefully reconnoitred.
Limbers must be close up, to facilitate hasty retirement.
Positions in rear must be chosen before the guns leave the
position they are holding.
A proportion of the guns should occupy the position in rear,
before all guns retire from the forward position, thus the
retirement of the last guns can be covered.
Village Fighting.—As soon as the infantry have made good one
edge of the village, the guns will be brought up as close to the firing-
line as possible.
They will then search windows, doorways, roofs, etc., likely to be
held by the enemy.

Guns will be used to command cross-streets, etc., so as to guard
against attacks on the flanks or rear of the infantry.
Guns should also be posted on the edges of the village, to prevent
flank attacks.
During village fighting every use should be made of windows,
doors, etc., as machine gun positions (see page 102).
Co-operation.—The necessity for co-operation between the
machine guns taking part in any particular action cannot be
overestimated.
Not only should the individual gun of a particular unit work upon
some definite plan for mutual support, but the sections of all units
that are operating together should co-operate with a view to
obtaining the best results from their combined action.
This cannot be done in action unless it has been previously
practised.
Therefore great attention should be paid to training a number of
guns to operate together for some specific purpose.
The following notes from overseas on machine guns, compiled by
Capt. E. Feilder (Attached Gen. Staff, A. T. C.), are of considerable
value:—

INSTRUCTIONS FOR MACHINE GUN
OFFICER.
1. The Machine Gun Officer should have a complete knowledge of
the nature of the action and the plans of the Commander.
2. The Commanding Officer should inform the M. G. Officer
generally of the part he expects the guns to play, and the particular
assistance he requires from him.
3. The M. G. Officer should then be allowed to form and carry out
his own plan of action in such a way as best meets the requirements
of the C. O. and the situation generally.
4. When possible, ample time should be given the M. G. Officer to
make his arrangements.
5. He should not be given hurried orders at the last moment; such
a proceeding is very seldom necessary.

SUGGESTIONS FOR THE EMPLOYMENT OF
THE MACHINE GUNS OF A BRIGADE
TAKING PART IN AN ATTACK ON AN
ENTRENCHED POSITION.
1. The whole of the machine guns must be organised under the
command of one Officer.
2. This Officer, in conjunction with the Section Officers, must
make detailed plans for the employment of the guns.
3. In this manner each gun or group of guns will have a specific
task allotted to it. Before the action commences all concerned will
thoroughly understand their duties.
4. It must be clearly understood by all Officers of the Brigade that
the machine guns have definite tasks allotted to them. That they are
under the command of the Brigade Machine Gun Officer, and are
therefore not to be given orders or otherwise interfered with by other
Officers.
5. The plans of the B. M. G. O. will have been made in consultation
with the Brigade Commander, who will have explained to him the
course that the action is expected to take.
All guns must be in their allotted places before the preliminary
bombardment commences.
6. The Machine Guns will be allotted as follows:—
A.—Some to go forward with the Attacking Infantry.
These guns should not open fire until the infantry advance takes
place.
Their role will be to make good the ground gained by the infantry
against counter attack.
They should advance in such a manner as to ensure their reaching
the position gained by the infantry in safety.

The locality in which the guns will be mounted in the captured
lines should be settled before the advance.
B.—Some to Cover the Infantry Advance.
The possibility of using guns for this purpose and their positions if
used depends on:—
1. The lie of the ground.
2. The position of your own and the enemy’s trenches.
When their role of covering fire is completed they should
automatically come again under the control of the B. M. G. O., who will
give them further orders.
C.—Some Detailed in Pairs to Engage the Enemy’s Machine
Guns when these are Located.
These may possibly go forward with the attacking Infantry. This
will depend on the nature of the ground, action, etc.
D.—Some in Reserve under the Brigade Commander.
These should be retained as a real reserve and not pushed too early
into the fight.
If the attack is to consist of more than one phase, that is to say, of
two or more distinct advances, separate plans must be made for
each.
Arrangements for the supply of ammunition, belt fittings,
ammunition depôts, etc., must be made before the action
commences. One Officer should be placed in charge of these
arrangements.
The B. M. G. O. should remain with the Brigadier. He should
provide himself with a suitable number of orderlies.

CO-OPERATION.
The necessity for co-operation between the machine guns taking
part in any particular action cannot be overestimated.
Not only should the individual guns of a particular unit work upon
some definite plan for mutual support, but the sections of all units
that are operating together should co-operate with a view to
obtaining the best results from their combined actions. This cannot
be done in action unless previously practised. Therefore attention
should be paid to training numbers of guns to operate together for
some specific purpose.

RANGES.
The ranges fired at have varied from 15 yards (at which, in one
instance, a German rush was stopped), to 2,800 yds., at which range
a battery of the enemy’s field artillery was silenced. This brings out
the importance of:—
1. The allowance for wind at long ranges.
2. The importance of range-taking, range cards, judging distance,
visual training, reference points, etc.
3. Practice of the “Swinging Traverse” for stopping rushes and
dealing with dense targets at very close range.
4. Practice of traversing by means of the “Automatic Tap” for
medium and long ranges.

NATURE OF TARGETS FIRED AT.
Targets have been of all kinds, such as:—
1. Dense masses at all ranges.
2. Extended lines at all ranges.
3. Artillery on the move and in action.
4. Edges of woods, hedges, ditches, etc., where enemy’s firing-line
was known to be, but in many cases could not be seen.
5. Enemy machine guns in all manner of positions, usually
invisible to the eye or even with glasses.
6. Hollows, wood, and other cover under which the enemy was
known to be concentrating.
7. Searching fire to try and locate and beat down hostile fire that
was being delivered from concealed positions.
The varied nature of the targets that the machine gunner may have
to engage brings out the fact that the machine gunner must be very
thoroughly trained, and emphasizes the points brought out under
“Ranges, Fire Orders, Indication and Recognition.”

FIRE ORDERS.
While in a large number of instances it has been possible to give
fire orders by word of mouth, this will, as a rule, be only possible
under exceptionally favourable circumstances.
Thus the successful co-operation of the guns working under one
leader will very largely depend on the mutual understanding that
exists between the Officer and his Gun Commanders.
Therefore the Officer must ensure that all those under him clearly
understand:—
1. The part the machine guns are intended to play.
2. The plans of the Machine Gun Officer.
3. The objects in view and the methods by which the Machine Gun
Officer hopes to attain them.
In this way, even when individual control by the Officer has been
lost, the desired effect will most likely be obtained, for each Gun
Commander will be striving to attain that effect, though, perhaps, by
different means.

METHODS EMPLOYED IN CONTROLLING
FIRE OF SECTION.
The following have been the usual methods:—
1. Fire orders by word of mouth.
2. Signals (including flashlights, etc.).
3. Telephones (in one or two cases in trenches).
4. Orderlies.
But whatever method is employed, a thorough understanding
between the Officer and those under him is essential.

NUMBER OF GUNS UNDER ONE COMMAND.
One Officer to a 4–Gun Section is not sufficient. Whether the guns
are grouped under the supreme command of one Senior Officer, or
whether they work in sections, there should always be one Officer to
each pair of guns.

ALTERNATIVE POSITIONS ARRANGED FOR.
The great importance of alternative positions being arranged for
cannot be overestimated. The best way of moving the gun from one
position to another without being seen should be studied. If guns are
located and shelled, either:—
1. Move guns at once to an alternative position or right away.
2. Let the gunners cease fire and get under cover until the shelling
ceases.
The first will be the more useful proceeding, but success has been
obtained several times with the second. For example:—
On one occasion, after shelling for some time, the artillery ceased,
thinking, no doubt, that they had “knocked out” the machine guns.
Massed enemy infantry then advanced, the machine guns opening
fire again from their old position with great effect.
The great importance of concealed approach in occupying
positions must be impressed on Machine Gun Officers.

GENERAL REMARKS OF INTEREST.
1. Lack of any organised method of using machine guns. Young
and inexperienced Officers are left in many cases to do what they
think best with their sections, without any previous consultation or
plan as to how guns can be most usefully employed.
2. Lack of any attempt at co-operation between the sections of the
units working together in any particular action.
3. Lack of initiative and push. This is usually due to want of
knowledge. Though the machine gun is a weapon of opportunity,
opportunities seldom occur to those who passively await them.
A good Machine Gun Officer, by keeping himself thoroughly in
touch with the situation, must have an opportunity to use his guns
with effect.
4. This lack of co-operation is seen both in the open and in trench
work. All this points to the fact that co-operation between the whole
of the machine guns taking part in any action is not sufficiently
studied.

GUNS BRIGADED IN ACTION.
On many of the occasions brought to notice in which machine guns
have been brigaded they have achieved marked success, but on the
whole not sufficient use has been made of this method of obtaining
the combined action of a number of guns.
“Brigading” guns does not mean “massing” them. It means the
“brigaded” guns are employed with some definite plan under the
direction of one Officer.
In all cases where the action of brigade guns has been successful
there has been:—
1. A thorough understanding of the plans of the Brigadier by the
B. M. G. O.
2. Conference between the B. M. G. O. and the Section Officers at
which the arrangements for the employment of the machine guns
were fully discussed.
3. Definite orders to the Section Officers.
4. A proportion of the guns held in reserve under the B. M. G. O.
But when the sections have been hastily collected together and
placed under the B. M. G. O., without time for making the above
arrangements, the result has usually been that sections have been
dispersed without definite orders or a complete understanding of the
situation, and effect has been lost.
In trench warfare the successful co-operation of the machine guns
assisting in the defence of any particular section of the entrenched
line has been obtained by:—
1. A previous reconnaissance of the whole line by the B. M. G. O.
2. Diagrams made of own and enemy’s trenches.
3. The number of emplacements.
This has enabled rapid concentration of the requisite number of
guns only on any one portion of the enemy’s line, and has prevented
unnecessary opening of fire and the consequent waste of
ammunition.

In many cases, however, Officers in command of troops in sections
of trench line have considered they are also in command of the
machine guns placed in that portion of the trench occupied by their
troops. This has led to:—
1. The disadvantage of dual control.
2. The guns being placed in the same emplacement day after day.
3. The arrangements of Machine Gun Officer being interfered with.
4. The guns being located by the enemy through an unnecessary
opening of fire ordered by an Officer who is not an expert in machine
gun tactics.

FIRE ORDERS.
The system of fire orders as taught at Hythe previous to the war
has been most successful.
Machine Gun Officers are also of opinion that, though it has often
been impossible to give orders by word of mouth, the systematic
training of all ranks in this system tends to ease of control under
difficult circumstances, and when a number of guns are being
employed for combined action.
This training forms a basis from which other methods of control
can most easily be evolved, and inculcates into the men the necessity
for assuring themselves that any orders received by them are passed
on by some means to those concerned.

“INDICATION AND RECOGNITION.”
The methods of “indication and recognition,” as taught at Hythe
before the war, have proved most useful. This fact has been brought
out in the accounts of the most successful machine gun actions, as
has also the great value of the use of range cards and indication
points. Targets are generally easy to indicate, as men are more alert
than in peace-time.
Training in indication, recognition, fire orders, and judging
distance, can be given at any time, as no apparatus is required.
This is also valuable, as it trains all ranks in a quick understanding
of directions given, study of ground, and trains the eye in quick
observation.

WORKING GUNS IN PAIRS AND INTERVALS
BETWEEN GUNS.
The necessity of using guns in pairs for mutual support in case of
mechanical trouble no longer holds good. Guns in the open have
usually been placed not less than 50 yards apart. This enables the
best use to be made of the ground as protection against artillery fire
and for concealment. In trench warfare guns should usually be
placed singly, arrangements being made for “cross fire” and mutual
support between the guns of any particular section of the defensive
line.

OBSERVATION OF FIRE.
Observation of fire has usually been obtainable up to 900 yards,
and in favourable circumstances at even longer ranges.
Even when the ground has been unfavourable, observation has
often been obtainable on water, walls of houses, enemy’s parapet,
etc.

OVERHEAD FIRE AND CONDITION OF
GROUND.
During the fighting on the Marne and on the Aisne, guns were
often able to support the infantry advance to within 100 yards of the
enemy’s position.
Even on flat ground frequent instances are given where overhead
fire has been used, with excellent effect, from buildings.
On the whole it would appear that not enough use is made of this
fire.
This is a question that should be carefully studied by all Machine
Gun Officers.

INDIRECT FIRE BY GRATICULES, LEVEL,
AIMING POSTS AND OBSERVATION.
All the suggested methods have been used, and in some cases
compasses and maps as well. Effect has been obtained in the open
and on enemy’s concentrations at long ranges, and in trench warfare
on working parties, ration parties, communications, etc., behind the
enemy’s lines. A great deal more could be done in this way if all guns
were not almost invariably placed in trenches, instead of a
proportion being placed in suitable positions in rear, and long-range
fire employed. All this points to the fact that a Machine Gun Officer
should be acquainted with all methods of employing indirect fire, in
order that he may be in a position to make the best of any
opportunities that may occur.

CLOSE CO-OPERATION BY MACHINE GUNS
WITH THE FRONT LINES OF ATTACKING
INFANTRY.
Very little information has been given on this subject, but co-
operation seems to have been very poor; but this co-operation is
made very difficult in many cases by:—
1. Inability of the M. G. sections to keep pace with the attacking
infantry.
2. The visibility of the methods employed of carrying the gun. This
leads to many casualties.
3. Lack of tactical knowledge on the part of many of the more
junior M. G. Os.
4. Lack of definite plans as to the role of the M. Gs. before the
action commences.
The two following examples serve to illustrate some of the above:—
1. In a recent attack, owing to lack of any previous understanding
between M. G. Os., eight M. Gs. converged into one small section of a
captured trench. Owing to lack of space only two of these guns were
able to come into action.
2. In another instance during an attack, six guns converged into
one small house. Owing to lack of space, etc., only two of these guns
were able to come into action.
Before an attack a certain M. G. Officer was told to await orders
from his Commanding Officer. He was forgotten and left behind.
In this case, as soon as the Officer realized that he had been
forgotten, he should have used his own initiative.
All these point to the fact that some arrangements for concerted
action should be made.
N. B.—See “Guns Brigaded in Action.”

OBTAINING AMMUNITION FROM LIMBER
FOR GUNS WHEN ATTACKING.
1. The usual system of using Nos. 3 and 4 as carriers is generally
adopted. Often these numbers are not sufficient for the work. It is
then necessary to borrow men from neighbouring squadrons or
companies.
2. The bringing up of ammunition is dangerous work; therefore it
is obviously best to avoid employing trained gunners if unskilled men
are available.
3. In this manner you conserve your trained gunners for replacing
casualties.
4. Pack animals can sometimes be brought close to the firing-line
when the ground is favourable, thus saving manual labour.
5. Several instances are given of confusion occurring during an
attack, owing to the limber moving without orders. This should be
guarded against.

CHIEF MECHANICAL TROUBLES.
The answer to this subject emphasizes the fact that when well
looked after, the Maxim or Vickers machine gun is thoroughly
reliable. Except in very few cases all breakages may be said to be due
to want of care. The following are the principal troubles that have
occurred:—
1. Broken Lock Spring.
From inquiries made it would appear that many gunners keep
their guns loaded with the lock spring compressed during the whole
period that the gun is in the trenches. This practice will be a fruitful
source of broken lock springs. The half loading motion should be
performed, and the lock spring released. To complete the loading
when required should not take more than one second.
2. Bulged Barrels.
These are due to mud getting into the barrel when the gun is being
carried into the trenches, while it is being mounted, or through
striking against the parapet when in position.
Waterproof sheets or sandbags should be put round the gun when
carrying it to or from the trenches.
3. Wet Belts.
These can generally be kept dry by covering the box with a
waterproof sheet; the exposed part of the belt also being covered by
that part of the sheet that is hung over the gun.
4. Muzzle Cups (Vickers’ Gun).

The reason for most of the breakages of these cups is that they are
screwed up too tight, thus allowing for no expansion of the metal of
the barrel owing to heat. At the same time they must not be too
loosely screwed up, as this will equally cause breakages.
5. Stove Pipe Attachment.
Complaints are made that this bursts at the seam. This seam can
easily be riveted by the armourer sergeant.
6. Loose Belts.
Loose belts have given trouble owing to wear.
7. Firing Pins.
A number of firing pins have been broken.
Beyond these few things mechanism troubles have been very rare.

USE OF PACK TRANSPORT.
Pack transport for both cavalry and infantry has been found to be
more mobile and less conspicuous than limbered wagons. A
combination of both is probably best. In many cases, before the war,
pack transport was never used; thus when issued it was little
understood. Sufficient attention is not paid to the selection of horses
for pack work. If the horses with easy action are selected the bad
effects of undue jolting can be minimized. Putting on pack and
getting in and out of action with it is too little practised.

THE FOLLOWING COMPLAINTS HAVE
BEEN RECEIVED.
1. Canvas ammunition carriers soon wear out. These can easily be
reinforced with leather by a saddler. A board placed underneath
them with rope passed through the brass eyelets has been found very
satisfactory.
2. Jolting of the pack causes the ammunition to slip back in the
belt, leading to faults in feed. Boxes can be lined with tin from biscuit
boxes. Ammunition has been carried in boxes that have been treated
in this way for long periods without any movement of the
ammunition.

PACKING AND CARRYING GUNS IN
LIMBER.
Almost every detachment appeared to have a different method of
packing their limbers. It is advisable that gun, tripod, etc., should be
carried in the front portion, as the rear half may have to be
discarded. In many cases boxes to hold the gun are fitted into the
limber itself with good results. Converted guns are sent in boxes too
long to fit the limber.

BREAKAGES TO LIMBER.
Perches, brakes and perch hooks have frequently broken. It is
thought that brakes are too often used instead of horses being made
to take the weight of the limber when descending hills.

BILLETS.
Most Machine Gun Officers appear to make every endeavour to
keep their men in practice, practice being daily given whether in or
out of the trenches. There are, however, exceptions, who state that
there is no time for training. As all brigades doing trench work are
similarly situated, this points to lack of effort in those particular
cases. In very few cases is any physical training attempted. This is
one of the most important parts of the training of any man who has
to carry a heavy weight at a rapid pace. After several days of trench
work this becomes more than ever necessary. It is suggested that
only the minimum number of men actually required to work the
guns should be kept in the trenches. The remainder of the team
should be practised daily, and every effort should be made to keep
them physically fit. In this way each man would do only very short
periods of trench work, and would be in every way better and more
prepared for really strenuous work when required.

TO TRAIN NEW MEN FOR GUN TEAMS.
Where instruction in billets is carried out on a properly organized
system there would appear to be no difficulty in training
considerable numbers of new men. In certain brigades, brigade
machine gun courses are held under a selected Officer; the men
attending these courses are kept out of the trenches for the duration
of the course. This would appear to be by far the most satisfactory
arrangement. Many Officers complain that as soon as they train a
reserve team it is placed in the ranks, the men fighting as ordinary
riflemen. Thus after an action when reserve men are required to
replace the casualties in the gun team, it is generally found that many
of these, on whose training as machine gunners much time and
trouble has been spent, have been killed or wounded. This is a
mistaken policy. In conclusion:—
1. Trained machine gunners are too valuable to be risked on any
work except their own particular job.
2. All trained reserves should be kept out of danger as much as
possible until required to replace casualties.
3. At ordinary times four men per gun are ample for work in
trenches; the remainder should be kept in reserve.
4. A proper system of training should be established in each
brigade.

PAINTING OF GUNS.
It is suggested that guns should be painted on the rainbow smudge
system, in order to make them less conspicuous and visible.

KEEPING OFFICERS IN PRACTICE.
It is very important that all Officers, when trained as machine
gunners, should be given opportunities of practice and of handling a
section. Thus they will be ready to take over the section at any time,
if required.

A Silver Model of a Maxim Gun.
War Trophies&Souvenirs
The Goldsmiths&Silversmiths Company have a selection of
designs open for inspection or special designs can be prepared
by expert artists free of charge. Shells, fuses and other War
Souvenirs can be mounted in suitable manner at moderate
prices. Estimates can be given for any work to be undertaken.
Catalogues and Photographs sent on application.
The
Goldsmiths&Silversmiths Company, Ltd.,
Jewellers to H. M. The King.
112, Regent Street, London, W.
No Branches.

TRADE
MARK.
GEO. CORDING LTD.
GUARANTEED
WATERPROOFS
WATERPROOF
TRENCH COAT
By
Appoi
ntme
nt To
H. M.
The
King.

Lightweight 90/–
Medium 105/–
Heavy 105/–
Fleece Linings 45/–
Without Rubber } Write for Prices.
„ (lined Oil Silk)
(Write giving chest measure and length required.)
WATERPROOF
BOOTS&WADERS
OVERALLS, OILSKINS
CAMP&HOSPITAL EQUIPMENT
Geo. CORDING Ltd.
Phones:—
Regent 3738
Gerrard 6327.
125, REGENT STREET 16, NEW BOND
STREET
London, W.1.
PIPE&McGILL,
LTD.
27, Maiden Lane, Bedford St.,
Strand, London, W. C. 2.

Actual Manufacturers
of Officers’ Uniforms
since 1868.
❧ ❧
Price List on Application.
❧ ❧
BEST MATERIAL AND
WORKMANSHIP ONLY.
Phone: Gerrard 3657.
Telegrams: “WEFT, RAND, LONDON.”
The Rimasop Trench Coat
Made by the old-established Bond
Street House of Rimell&Allsop, this coat
embodies the suggestions of British
Officers who have fought in France and
Flanders since the beginning of the War.
War experience has proved its practical
value. Officers are invited to avail
themselves of the experienced services of
Messrs. Rimell&Allsop in the selection of any kit, either for
Ceremonial occasions or for the Front.
A 16–page booklet will be sent post free to any address by

Rimell&Allsop,
Sporting&Military Tailors,
54, New Bond Street, London, W.
WRIGHT’S
Coal Tar
SOAP
is now known as the
Soldiers’ Soap.
It Soothes, Protects, Heals.
Bournemouth, 1916.
Dear Sirs,
I am sending you an extract from my son’s letter (he is on
active service, somewhere in France). I wrote asking if I should
send him vermin powder, and his reply is: “DON’T SEND ANY
VERMIN POWDER, THANKS; I USE WRIGHT’S COAL TAR
SOAP, THAT’S AS EFFECTIVE AND MUCH MORE
PLEASANT.”
It seems to me a unique and spontaneous tribute to your
soap.
Yours truly, S.....

4½d. PER TABLET.
B. S. A.
RIFLES
AND
SIGHTS
The very extensive B. S. A. rifle and sight
plant is at present exclusively engaged in
the manufacture of service pattern arms
for the War Department. The production
of the various B. S. A. target and sporting
rifles and sights will be resumed as soon as the pressure due to
the war eases off.
There are still remaining in stock a few rifles of ·250, ·300,
·310, and ·32/20 bore.
WRITE FOR DETAILS, POST FREE.
B. S. A. Rifle “Safetipaste”
THE “NO TROUBLE” RIFLE BARREL PRESERVER.
Abolishes the arduous process of scrubbing out rifle barrels.
The bore of the barrel has merely to be coated with the
preparation. Acid and other products of combustion at once
rendered quite harmless. Rifle may safely be put aside for any
period. Simply wipe out the bore before firing again. Its polish
may be even more brilliant than before.
Sold by all Gunmakers at 1/– per tube.
Inventors and Sole Manufacturers:—
THE BIRMINGHAM SMALL ARMS CO., LTD.,

BIRMINGHAM.
H. Graham Bennet,
Uniform Specialist,
58, Moorgate Street, LONDON, E. C.
Telephone No.: LONDON WALL 205.
Estimate for Outfit for Second Lieutenant
of Infantry
on joining Unit (Home Service).

£ s. d.
1 Service Jacket, whipcord material 4 14 6
1 pair Collar Badges for ditto 0 6 6
1 pair Knicker-breeches, whipcord material 1 10 0
1 Service Jacket, fine grade serge 3 10 0
1 pair Collar Badges for ditto 0 6 6
1 pair “Slacks” to match 1 5 0
British Warm Coat (Lined Woollen Plaid) 3 15 0
1 pair Gilt Stars for shoulders of ditto 0 2 6
Sam Browne Belt, fine grade, with two braces, frog,
holster, pouch, etc., complete 2 5 0
Cap and Badge 1 0 0
1 pair Spiral Puttees 0 7 6
Haversack 0 7 6
Water Bottle 0 12 6
Whistle and Lanyard 0 2 6
Great Coat Carrier, best grade sling and swivels 0 8 6
3 Best Quality Khaki Flannel Shirts at 10/6 1 11 6
6 Collars to match at 1/6 0 9 0
2 Khaki Silk Knitted Ties at 2/6 0 5 0
22 19 0
Wolseley Valise and Camp Kit complete 7 10 0
30 9 0
Infantry Pattern Burberry Coat 3 13 6
£34 2 6
Strictly Net Cash.
NOTE.—The above figures are a quotation for the complete
outfit, and do not refer in every case to separate items.
All the above articles of best materials, best cut and style and
sound workmanship.

Full detailed price list and list of regiments, etc., for which
outfits have been supplied, can be had on application.
Speciality—Promptitude.
BENSON’S
LUMINOUS
“Active Service” Watch.
VISIBLE AT NIGHT.
WARRANTED TIMEKEEPERS.
Silver Crystal Glass, £3 3s.
Silver Hunter or Half Hunter, £3 15s.
Gold Crystal Glass £8 0s.
„ Hunter or Half Hunter £8 10s.
Others in Silver from £2 10s.
Fine quality lever movement, fully luminous figures and hands,
and extra heavy Screw case (special to our make).
Illustrated Lists of Wristlet Watches, Rings (with size card),
Watches, Chains, Jewels, etc., post free.

62&64, LUDGATE HILL,
E. C. 4, and 25, OLD
BOND STREET, W. 1.
“SWAN-
ALWAYS WEAR
STRIPE” Pyjamas.
Will not shrink.
Known throughout the world as Swan&Edgar’s Pyjamas.
REFUSE
SUBSTITUTES.
“MERCERISED”
(thin), 6/11 3 for 20/–
CEYLON WOOL,
Medium Weight, 6/11
3 for 20/–
BEST WOOL MIXTURE,
12/6 3 for 36/–

HEAVY PURE WOOL,
18/6 3 for 54/–
PURE SILK,
21/– 35/– 45/–
We hold the largest stock of Pyjamas in London.
ALL PYJAMAS SENT POST FREE IN U. K.
Height and Chest Measurement required.
Swan&Edgar
LTD.
Regent Street and Piccadilly, London, W.
is particularly valuable for use on the Field, in the Hospital, in
the Canteen and in Training
It aids and increases nutrition and stimulates and builds up
strength to resist climatic changes; it is invaluable for all who
have to undergo exertion either to promote fitness or to
recuperate after fatigue.

OXO, Ltd., Thames House, London, E. C. 4.
Don’t forget to take
BRYANT&MAY’S
“KAMPITE”
SAFETY TRENCH COOKER
NO SPIRIT NO LIQUID
SAFE, CLEAN&RELIABLE
Complete with collapsible stand and six fuel blocks.
Made by BRYAN&MAY, LTD.,
Manufacturers of the celebrated
‘Brymay’ Safety Matches&Swan Vestas

Smart Yet Dependable
Prior to the invention of THE TIELOCKEN, a Weatherproof
combining the smart Service appearance requisite to the
Soldier, with such protective powers as would enable it to resist
the heaviest downpour and keenest wind, may be said to have
been non-existent.
In every case one quality had to be sacrificed for the benefit of
the other, and to-day
THE TIELOCKEN
is the only Service top-coat that
successfully unites both these essential
characteristics.
Its design ensures that, from chin to
knees, every vulnerable part of the body is
doubly protected.
It affords effective security, yet is
healthfully self-ventilating—excludes
heavy rain, yet is free from rubber or other
air-tight fabrics—is airylight, and yet
warm in chilly weather.
Another advantage is its quick
adjustment. A belt holds securely—no
buttons to fasten.
NEW KIT
BURBERRYS supply well-tailored Uniforms in Burberry-proofed
cloths, suitable for any part of the world, as well as every detail of

equipment.
Officers’ Complete Kits in 2 to 4 Days or Ready for Use.
Illustrated Military Catalogue Post Free.
BURBERRYS Haymarket LONDON
8&10 Boulevard Malesherbes PARIS; Basingstoke and Provincial
Agents
The Best Boots
for
Active Service
are
Faulkners’ Norwegians
in their
Special Service
Leather.
The Smartest
Boots
for
Home Service
are
Faulkners’ Field Boots.
Write for Descriptive Booklets of Boots,
Leggings and Spurs; also Self-
Measurement Apparatus if unable to call.
Faulkner&Son
SPECIALISTS IN SERVICE BOOTS&LEGGINGS.

51&52, SOUTH MOLTON STREET, LONDON, W. 1.
And 26, Trinity Street, Cambridge.

Freedom.
“It is not to be thought of that the Flood
Of British freedom, which to the open Sea
Of the world’s praise from dark antiquity
Hath flowed, ‘with pomp of waters, unwithstood,’
Roused though it be full often to a mood
Which spurns the check of salutary bands,
That this most famous Stream in Bogs and Sands
Should perish; and to evil and to good
Be lost for ever. In our Halls is hung
Armoury of the invincible Knights of old:
We must be free or die, who speak the tongue
That Shakespeare spake; the faith and morals hold
Which Milton held.—In everything we are sprung
Of Earth’s first blood, have titles manifold.”
William Wordsworth, 1802.
CHARING CROSS
Turkish Baths
Nevill’s
Northumberland Avenue
PRONOUNCED TO BE THE FINEST IN EUROPE
Are the last word in Comfort and Luxury
Cure
Rheumatism, Lumbago,
Sciatica, Colds, Strains,

Stiffness, Etc.
THEY MAKE AND KEEP YOU FIT... And at
LONDON BRIDGE, BROAD STREET, CITY,
EDGWARE ROAD, Etc., Etc.
THESE BOOKS WILL HELP YOU
PLATOON&COMPANY DRILL
Compiled by the Commandant and Staff of the London
District School of Instruction, Chelsea Barracks. Illustrated.
The last word in Drill.
Price 1/–, post free 1/1.
BATTALION DRILL ILLUSTRATED
A very practical work widely used throughout the country.
Fully illustrated.
Price 1/– net, post free 1/1.
DUTIES FOR ALL RANKS
Will be of considerable help to you. Gives all duties from
the Private to the C. O. Etiquette, Officers’ Messes, hints to
young Officers, how to look after your Platoon, &c., &c.
Price 6d. net, post free 7d.

KNOWLEDGE FOR WAR
Every Officer’s handbook for the Front. Based on the War
Office Syllabus. Expert information on every subject which an
Officer must know before being selected for service in the
field.
Price 2s. 6d. net, post free 2s. 8d.
COURTS-MARTIAL FOR PRESIDENTS
AND MEMBERS
A complete guide to this intricate subject by a D. A. A. and
Q. M. G.
Price 5/–, post free 5/5.
RIFLE SHOOTING FOR WAR
A valuable adjunct to Musketry Regulations.
Price 6d. net, post free 7d.
Send a postcard for full List of Books:
HARRISON&SONS,
Printers in Ordinary to His Majesty,
ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W. C.
MILITARY PUBLICATIONS

Swedish Drill Illustrated
The Maxim of
the Moment
GET FIT!
FOR EVERYBODY
Written by Army Gymnastic Expert. Plain, Simple and Concise
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Recruit Training (Infantry) 1914
An aid to an
Instructors
NET –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
ADOPTED BY COMMANDERS EVERYWHERE
Infantry Pocket Book
A Great Boon for
Infantry Officers
and N. C. Os.
Full of Everyday Hints and Data

WITH SPECIALLY RULED PAGES FOR
Nominal Roll, Duty Roster, Register, &c., &c.
PRICE 1/– NET
Post Free 1/1
From the Front: Notes for the New
Armies
Full of
Valuable
Hints
Written from Personal Experience
Much can be learnt from this book which will prove extremely
serviceable
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Squad Drill Illustrated
Practically Written
Graphically Depicted
Including
SECTION DRILL
PLATOON DRILL
RIFLE EXERCISES
EXTENDED ORDER

Can be understood by anybody
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Company Drill Illustrated
(IN RED
COVER)
Illustrating clearly each movement and showing the positions of
commanders
THE NEXT BOOK TO “SQUAD DRILL”
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Battalion Drill Illustrated
Indispensable
to Officers and N. C. Os.
Full of Graphic Illustrations
A wealth of detail invaluable to all who are in command of
Units of any denomination
PRICE 1/– NET
Post Free 1/1

Guard Duty Illustrated
Direct—Simple—Useful
Full of Information
Invaluable alike to the Regulars&Volunteers All you want to
know about Guard Duties
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Handbook for Company Officers
A Valuable Aid
for all Officers
and N. C. Os.
HANDY SIZE 1/6 CLOTH BOUND
Post Free 1/9
“This convenient and well-arranged handbook sets out in
clear and simple language an epitome of the duties which fall
to a company officer and a group leader.”
Duties for all Ranks
A Compendium
of Information
Specially compiled, clear and concise, embracing
Adjutant’s Duties. Officers’ Messes

A Guide for all—Regulars and Volunteers—from C. O. to
Private
Every Officer, N. C. O. and Private should have a copy of this
Manual
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Knowledge for War
Expert information on
all Subjects taken under
the W. O. Syllabus
EVERY OFFICER’S HANDBOOK FOR THE FRONT
PRICE 2/6 NET
Post Free 2/9
Written by Experts. Send a postcard for full syllabus
Platoon&Company Drill
The Chelsea
Barracks
Text Book
OFFICIALLY ADOPTED BY THE WAR OFFICE
See September, 1916, Army Orders
PRICE 1/– NET

Post Free 1/1
Rifle Shooting for War
A Practical
Illustrated Book
The outcome of the experience of an International Rifleman
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Fire Orders Direction&Control
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Aids to Musketry
A Valuable Manual on
an Important Subject
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Machine Gun Manual

With Drill, Fire Orders
& Notes from the Front
A COMPLETE MANUAL TO MACHINE GUNNERY
Maxim—Vickers—Lewis—Colt—Hotchkiss
PRICE 1/– NET
Post Free 1/2
Trench Sketching Illustrated
A Booklet of extreme
practical value
COMPASS AND PERISCOPE WORK
PRICE –/9 NET
Post Free Tenpence
The War Manual
Two Volumes Now Ready
Full Prospectus Post Free
PRICE 5/– NET
Each
Courts-Martial
Full Proceedings
thoroughly described

INVALUABLE TO ALL OFFICERS
Should be in every Mess
PRICE 5/– NET
Post Free 5/3
Summaries of Evidence Courts of
Enquiry, &c.
Will help
you over
many a fix
With complete formulas and examples
PRICE –/9 NET
Post Free Tenpence
Modern Range Finders
Will increase the efficiency
of the Range
Finder in everyday use
A thoroughly descriptive Booklet
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence

Miniature Rifle Ranges
Fully Illustrated
Really Practical
All owning or about to own a range should have this book
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Bayonet Fighting for War
With 55 Photographic
Illustrations
THE JU-JITSU OF BAYONET WORK
Valuable knowledge in a tight corner
PRICE –/9 NET
Post Free Tenpence
Company&Platoon Commands
A Pocket
Aid to
Memory
PRICE –/3 NET
Post Free –/3½

Automatic Pistols&Revolvers
Every Officer should peruse this book
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
Artillery Field Formulæ
For 18–pr. and
15–pr. B. L. C.
ALL THE NECESSARY DATA AT A GLANCE
Compact for the Pocket. Printed on Linen
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
The “Sight-Angle” Sketch Block
(Terrell’s
Patent)
For the making
of Perspective
Sketches
INVALUABLE FOR ARTILLERY&INFANTRY
(With full Directions and Specimen)
SKETCH BLOCK 3/– Post Free 3/4

Waterproof case for same 2/6 Post Free 2/8
Case and Block complete 5/6 Post Free 6/–
Maze Drill Illustrated
A Valuable Adjunct for Training
PRICE 1/– NET
Post Free 1/2
English-Flemish Military Guide
Wholly elaborated close to the line
of battle, where the first editions
have also been printed and sold
PRICE –/10 NET
Post Free 1/–
Invaluable to all Troops proceeding to Flanders
Military Guide for the Eastern Campaign
Extremely helpful to those
in or about to proceed to
EGYPT, SALONICA,
MESOPOTAMIA, &c.
With Field Vocabulary in English-French-Greek-Turkish

PRICE 2/6 NET
Post Free 2/9
Physical Drill for Home Defence Corps
With Illustrations
and Specimen
Lessons
PRICE –/6 NET
Post Free Sevenpence
English-French Guides&Vade-Mecums
Full List
Post Free
Canvas and Camaraderie
A Charming
Souvenir for
your Friends
FULLY ILLUSTRATED
“Should prove a blessing in every camp, the collection of
songs being most interesting.”
Vide Press.
PRICE –/6 NET

Post Free Sevenpence
Field States British Expeditionary Force
AND
OTHER
DATA
PRICE 1/– NET
Post Free 1/1
“A mass of data; strength, road space, animals, transport,
tools, medical services, bridging material, camp billets, etc.; of
great value for quick reference.”
SMART, SERVICEABLE AND
SOLDIERLY.
Let the Leading Military Tailors make your kit and you are
assured of quality in material, soldierly smartness in cut,
correctness in detail, and strict moderation in cost. Thresher’s
Guide illustrates and describes everything in Officers’
Uniforms and Equipment. The long experience and wide
knowledge which it embodies are invaluable to the Cadet
receiving a commission who wishes to be well and efficiently
equipped without throwing away money.
The Guide is kept constantly up-to-date, fresh editions,
containing the latest information, being frequently published.
Write for Guide (E) to Kit and Equipment.

A FEW PRICES.
£ s. d.
Whipcord F. S. Jacket 4 4 0
Slacks 1 12 6
Bedford Cord Riding Breeches 3 3 0
Service Cap 0 15 6
British Warm from 4 4 0
Sam Browne Belt and Shoulder Strap 1 7 6
THRESHER&GLENNY
152&153, STRAND
LONDON, W. C. 2.
By
Appoint
ment to
H. M. The
King.

Estd. 1850.
Elvery’s
Ltd.
“Waterproof” Trencher
☛ ELVERY’S TRENCHER is made of
“Triple-proofed” fabric without the aid of
Oilsilk or Cotton, and is unsurpassed as a
reliable “Trench Coat.”
¶ “Land&Water” says: “it is a good
coat worthy of the consideration of all
officers in need of a really reliable coat.”
4½
Best make&finish, special value,
gns.
Active Service
Waterproof, 3 gns.
(Guaranteed Stormproof.)
☛ Elvery’s are waterproof Experts, and are replete with all
Waterproof Kit Requirements, Boots, Leggings, Gloves, etc.
£7 10s.
Complete War Office Kit,
J. W. ELVERY&CO., Ltd.,
Waterproof Specialists,
ELEPHANT HOUSE, Estd. 1850,
31, CONDUIT STREET, LONDON, W.
(One door from New Bond Street), And at DUBLIN&CORK.

TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES
1. Moved ads prior to the title page to the end of the text.
2. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and
variations in spelling.
3. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings
as printed.
4. Re-indexed footnotes using numbers.
5. On page 87, “are as on pages.” is printed that way.