Making Sense of
Ballistic Missile Defense
An Assessment of Concepts and
Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase
Missile Defense in Comparison to
Other Alternatives
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Making Sense of
Ballistic Missile Defense:
An Assessment of Concepts and
Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase
Missile Defense in Comparison to
Other Alternatives
Committee on an Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in
Comparison to Other Alternatives
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
Washington, D. C.
www. nap. edu
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy
of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of
the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard
for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Contract No. HQ0147-09-C-0002 between the National Academy of
Sciences and the Missile Defense Agency. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or
recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-10: 978-0-309-21610-4
Copies of this report are available from:
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, National Research Council, The Keck Center of the
National Academies, 500 Fifth Street, N. W., Room WS904, Washington, DC 20001; and
The National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-
6242 or (202) 334-3313; http://www. nap. edu.
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
ii
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars
engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their
use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy
has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J.
Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of
Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal
government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national
needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M.
Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the
public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional
charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care,
research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad
community of science and technology with the Academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the
federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has
become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.
The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and
Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www. national-academies. org
iii
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
COMMITTEE ON AN ASSESSMENT OF CONCEPTS AND SYSTEMS FOR U. S.
BOOST-PHASE MISSILE DEFENSE IN COMPARISON TO OTHER ALTERNATIVES
L. DAVID MONTAGUE, Menlo Park, California, Co-Chair
WALTER B. SLOCOMBE, Caplin&Drysdale, Chartered, Co-Chair
DAVID K. BARTON, Hanover, New Hampshire
MELVIN H. EISMAN, RAND Corporation
DAVID L. FRIED, Royal Oaks, California
ALEC D. GALLIMORE, University of Michigan
EUGENE HABIGER, Gen, USAF (Ret.), University of Georgia
HARVEY L. LYNCH, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University (retired)
KENNETH C. MALLEY, VADM, USN (Ret.), Edgewater, Maryland
C. WENDELL MEAD, AGRI, Incorporated
DANIEL L. MONTGOMERY, BG, USA (Ret.), Strategic Defense Solutions
C. KUMAR PATEL, Pranalytica, Incorporated
JONATHAN D. POLLACK, Brookings Institution
DAVID M. VAN WIE, Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
DAVID R. VAUGHAN, RAND Corporation
DEAN WILKENING, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Staff
CHARLES F. DRAPER, Study Director; Director, Naval Studies Board
RAYMOND S. WIDMAYER, Senior Program Officer
SUSAN G. CAMPBELL, Administrative Coordinator
MARY G. GORDON, Information Officer
ROSE NEUGROSCHEL, Research Associate (April 18, 2011, through January 20, 2012)
SEKOU O. JACKSON, Senior Project Assistant (through April 8, 2011)
iv
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Preface
Current U. S. policy is to deploy as soon as technologically possible an effective National
Missile Defense system capable of defending the territory of the United States against limited
ballistic attack, whether accidental, unauthorized, or deliberate.1 The Missile Defense Agency
(MDA) of the U. S. Department of Defense (DOD) plays a central role in supporting the
Secretary of Defense (SECDEF) in developing and fielding an integrated, layered, ballistic
missile defense system.
Ballistic missile defense (BMD) considers engaging threats during the boost phase, the
midcourse phase, and the terminal phase of flight. Boost-phase defense encompasses
engagements during the time period when the threat booster is still accelerating. The midcourse
defense layer can be divided into (1) ascent phase, when the threat system is engaged prior to
apogee, and (2) descent phase, when intercept occurs after apogee. The term “early intercept” is
sometimes used to describe intercept after boost in the initial portions of the ascent phase of the
threat system before apogee.2 Finally, terminal defense refers to engagements as and after
warheads reenter the atmosphere and become subject to drag and reentry heating.
TERMS OF REFERENCE
The Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (Public
Law 110-417) directed the SECDEF to enter into an agreement with the National Academy of
Sciences (NAS) in order to conduct an independent study of concepts and systems for U. S.
boost-phase missile defense compared with “non-boost”-defense alternatives.3 Subsequent to
ensuring that all the necessary contracting and industrial security requirements were met by the
NAS and MDA, the two parties entered into a contract agreement and, in December 2009, the
NAS president appointed the Committee on an Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S.
Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives.4 The terms of reference for
the study—that is, the committee’s charge—include the following.
1. Content—the study should include:
(a) The extent to which boost-phase missile defense is technically feasible and
practical; against potential ballistic missile threats against the United States, its forces
deployed abroad, and its allies;
(b) Whether any demonstration efforts by the Department of Defense of boost-phase
missile defense technology existing as of the date of the study (including the Airborne
Laser and the Kinetic Energy Interceptor) have a high probability of performing a
boost-phase missile defense mission in an operationally effective, suitable, and
survivable manner; and
1National Missile Defense Act of 1999, Public Law 106-38.
2Within this report, an additional term “postboost, predeployment” is used to describe engagements where the boost phase has
ended but deployment of submunitions or countermeasures has not yet occurred. This phase can be very short or nonexistent for
certain threat systems.
3A copy of the congressional tasking is provided in Appendix A. In addition, the term “systems” is used in place of “concepts
and systems” throughout this report, and the term can be either present or proposed.
4Biographies for the committee members are provided in Appendix B. The committee includes experts with experience in
industry, academia, and government—combined with many years in strategic and tactical missile and missile defense
technologies, system design and analysis, program management, policy, and cost modeling of major weapon systems as well as
proven track records in deployment and operational command of these systems. That experience included knowledge of the
history of ballistic missile defense, its technology evolution, and programs spanning the period from Nike X, Sentinel/Safeguard
to the present.
v
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
(c) Comparison of effectiveness, limitations and relative life cycle cost with other
existing or anticipated alternatives that engage missiles in other phases of their flight.
2. Boost-Phase Systems to be examined—the study should include:
(a) The Airborne Laser;
(b) The Kinetic Energy Interceptor (land based and sea based options); and
(c) Other existing boost-phase technology demonstration programs.
3. Factors to be evaluated in comparing boost-phase systems with other alternatives—the
study should include:
(a) Technical capability of the system(s) against scenarios identified in paragraph (4)
below;
(b) Operational issues, including operational effectiveness;
(c) The results of key milestone tests conducted prior to preparation of the report;
(d) Survivability;
(e) Suitability;
(f) Concepts of operations, including basing considerations;
(g) Operations and maintenance support;
(h) Command and control considerations, including timelines for detection, decision-
making, and engagement;
(i) Shortfall and debris from intercepts;
(j) Force structure requirements;
(k) Effectiveness against countermeasures;
(l) Estimated cost of sustaining the system in the field;
(m) Reliability, availability, and maintainability;
(n) Geographic considerations, including limitations on the ability to deploy systems
within operational range of potential targets; and
(o) Cost and cost-effectiveness, including total lifecycle cost estimates.
4. Scenarios to be assessed—the study should include an assessment of each system
identified in paragraph (2) above regarding the performance and operational capabilities
of the system to:
(a) Counter short-range, medium-range, and intermediate-range ballistic missile
threats from rogue states to the deployed forces of the United States and its allies; and
(b) Defend the territory of the United States against limited ballistic missile attack.
5. Comparison with non-boost systems—the study should include an assessment of the
performance and operational capabilities of non-boost missile defense systems to counter
the scenarios identified in paragraph (4) above. (The results under this paragraph shall be
compared to the results under paragraph (4) above.) For purposes of this paragraph, non-
boost missile defense systems include:
(a) Patriot PAC-3 System and the Medium Extended Air Defense System follow-on
system;
(b) Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System, with all variants of the Standard Missile-
3 interceptor;
(c) Terminal High Altitude Area Defense System; and
(d) Ground-Based Midcourse Defense System.
vi
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
THE COMMITTEE’S APPROACH
The committee first convened in January 2010 and held several data-gathering and report
drafting meetings over an 18-month period.5 In order to address its charge, in part, the
committee received briefings from DOD, congressional staff, nongovernmental organizations,
and other individuals and organizations, in classified and open sessions. In particular, the
committee received many briefings and much information from MDA. Here, the committee
sought and received a look into the analyses and rationales behind MDA-sponsored programs.
However, the committee also utilized its own independent systems analysis and simulation and
costing expertise, in addition to leveraging its members’ expertise accumulated over the years in
the research and development, management, and operational command of major missile
defensive and offensive missile programs.
Its study is a technical one: The committee has not understood its charter to be to
consider the many important policy issues presented by missile defense, including their effect on
deterrence, strategic stability, arms control, alliance relations, the appropriate level of funding for
missile defense relative to other priorities, and relations with Russia and China. However, its
technical charter is a broad one. As described in the terms of reference and reiterated at the
inaugural meeting, when the committee met with congressional staff, the study is to compare
boost-phase missile defense systems with non-boost-phase defense systems, i. e., alternative
defense systems. The committee has understood this to mean that it should consider the full
range of systems, programs, and approaches and not confine its analysis to strictly boost-phase
defense.
Accordingly, the committee examined portions of the current Ground-Based Midcourse
Defense (GMD) system, the Aegis, Patriot (PAC-3), and Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense
(THAAD) systems currently being fielded, as well as their proposed upgrades and all boost-
phase missile defense systems that had been considered, including the Airborne Laser (ABL), the
Kinetic Energy Interceptor (KEI), and other existing or contemplated boost-phase technology
demonstrations (e. g., space-based interceptors and airborne interceptors launched from tactical
air platforms). In addition, the committee examined the planned Phased Adaptive Approach
(PAA)—that is, the Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense system, with all variants of the standard
missile-3 interceptor given its relevance to the non-boost systems identified in the terms of
reference.
The committee considered the supporting sensor requirements for the various boost-phase
and non-boost systems, and each was studied to understand its utility against the criteria
identified by the Congress in the terms of reference (e. g., effectiveness, resilience to
countermeasures, force structure and realistic operational concepts, and life cycle cost in
comparison with other alternatives).
To support the analysis of life-cycle costs, cost data on prior and current MDA-
sponsorsed programs and technology efforts were gathered from various sources, including from
MDA and the Congressional Budget Office, as well as programmatic and parametric data related
to the development, procurement, and operating and support costs of other existing major DOD,
NASA, and commercial systems with elements similar to those planned for ballistic missile
defense. Armed with this analogous database of information, the committee developed “should”
5A summary of the committee’s meeting is provided in Appendix C. The committee met with representatives from the Office
of the Secretary of Defense, Department of the Air Force, Department of the Army, Department of the Navy, U. S. Northern
Command, and U. S. Strategic Command among others in DOD such as the Missile Defense Agency, as well as representatives
from the Department of State, the intelligence community, government laboratories, and the industrial base. In addition, the
committee travelled to Fort Greely, Alaska, to review the operational doctrine and preparedness for the limited Ground-Based
Midcourse Defense (GMD) system currently in place. The committee also held an open meeting where public input could be
provided.
vii
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
to “will” cost-bounded range estimates for each of the boost-phase and non-boost systems
examined in this report.6
This unclassified report is organized as follows: Chapters 1 through 4 comprise the
committee’s comparison of systems for U. S. boost-phase missile defense with other “non-boost”
alternatives. Chapter 5 outlines a path forward, including those activities that in its judgment
should be redirected or terminated, including the various supporting sensors required. Here, the
committee found systems engineering and analysis that need improvement and areas where the
current ballistic missile defense capability for U. S. homeland defense—the GMD—should be
reevaluated and modified as necessary in order to improve its overall effectiveness to achieve the
desired end state while taking proactive steps to substantially reduce future costs. Although this
report is unclassified, the committee also produced a separate classified annex, which does not
modify any of the report’s findings and recommendations but provides supporting material for
them and sets forth details of its analysis.
The months between the committee’s last meeting and the publication of the unclassified
report and classified annex were spent preparing the draft manuscripts, gathering additonal
information, reviewing and responding to the external review comments, editing the unclassified
report and classified annex, and conducting the security review needed to produce both an
unclassified report and a classified annex.
In addition, the Missile Defense Agency has approved this unclassified report for public
release with the following distribution statement and release number applicable: Distribution
Statement A, Approved for Public Release, 12-MDA-6981.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The committee thanks the many briefers who presented information essential to the
writing of this unclassified report and its classified annex. In particular, the committee is
especially grateful to the Missile Defense Agency (MDA) staff in Washington, D. C., who
facililated the committee’s efforts in gathering information related to the study tasking, such as
military and technical information related to the systems for U. S. boost-phase and non-boost
missile defense systems. It is also appreciative of the MDA staff at Huntsville, Alabama, during
a site visit, and to the operators at Fort Greely Air Force Base and the U. S. Northern Command,
who shared operational and technical insights with respect to the GMD system.
6The range cost estimates follow the Office of the Secretary of Defense policy guidance described in the Defense Acquisition
University article “Drive Productivity Growth Through Will Cost/Should Cost Management,” issued by the Acquisition
Community Connection, https://acc. dau. mil/CommunityBrowser. aspx? id=400180&lang=en-US.
viii
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse
perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National
Research Council’s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to
provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft
manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to
thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Michael Bennett, Congressional Budget Office,
Joseph M. Cosumano, Jr., LTG, USA (retired), Madison, Alabama,
Raymond Jeanloz, University of California, Berkeley,
William LaPlante, MITRE,
George “Pete” Nanos, VADM, USN (retired), Johns Hopkins University, Applied
Physics Laboratory,
David O. Overskei, Decision Factors, Inc.,
John P. Stenbit, Oakton, Virginia, and
Larry D. Welch, Gen, USAF (retired), Institute for Defense Analyses.
Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they
see the final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by John
Ahearne of Sigma Xi (emeritus). Appointed by the National Research Council, he was
responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in
accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully
considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring
committee and the institution.
ix
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
x
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Contents
SUMMARY S-1
1 INTRODUCTION 1-1
Brief History of Ballistic Missile Defense, 1-1
Evolving Ballistic Missile Threats, 1-2
Ballistic Missile Defense Missions and Systems Examined, 1-5
Organization of the Report, 1-8
2 U. S. BOOST-PHASE DEFENSE 2-1
Background, 2-1
Proposed Systems, 2-2
Analysis, 2-7
Findings, 2-29
3 ALTERNATIVES TO U. S. BOOST-PHASE DEFENSE 3-1
Present and Proposed Systems, 3-2
Analysis, 3-8
Findings, 3-25
4 COMPARISON OF UTILITY, MATURITY, AND COST EFFECTIVENESS 4-1
Comparison of Boost-Phase and Non-Boost-Phase Systems, 4-1
Sensor Comparison, 4-6
Finding, 4-10
Recommendations, 4-13
5 RECOMMENDED PATH FORWARD 5-1
Organization, 5-1
Basis for Major Recommendations, 5-1
Key CONOPS or Effective Defense of the United States and Canada, 5-2
Recommended GMD Evolution—The Interceptor, 5-12
Recommended GMD Evolution—The Sensors, 5-18
Results of Engagement Analysis and Simulation of the System in Defending
the Homeland, 5-21
Final Comments, 5-35
APPENDIXES
A Terms of Reference A-1
B Biographies of Committee Members and Staff B-1
C Summary of Meetings C-1
D Acronyms and Abbreviations D-1
E System Cost Methodology E-1
xi
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Summary
The tasking for the Committee on an Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S.
Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives, stated in Section 232 of the
Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2009 (Public Law 110-417),
is provided in Appendix A of this report.1 In short, the congressional tasking requests an
assessment of the feasibility, practicality, and affordability of U. S. boost-phase missile defense
compared with that of the U. S. non-boost missile defense when (1) countering short-, medium-,
and intermediate-range ballistic missile threats from rogue states to deployed forces of the
United States and its allies and (2) defending the territory of the United States against limited
ballistic missile attack. Box S-1 and Figure S-1 introduce some of the terminology used in this
summary and the rest of the unclassified report.
To provide a context for this analysis of present and proposed U. S. boost-phase and non-
boost missile defense concepts and systems, the committee considered the following to be the
missions for ballistic missile defense (BMD): (1) protection of the U. S. homeland against
nuclear weapons, other weapons of mass destruction (WMD), or conventional ballistic missile
attacks; (2) protection of U. S. forces, including military bases, logistics, command and control
facilities, and deployed forces themselves in theaters of operation against ballistic missile attacks
armed with WMD or conventional munitions; and (3) protection of U. S. allies, partners, and host
nations against ballistic-missile-delivered WMD and conventional weapons.2 A fourth mission,
protection of the U. S. homeland, allies, and partners against accidental or unauthorized launch,
was considered as a collateral benefit of any ballistic mission defense but not as a goal that
drives system requirements.3 Consistent with U. S. policy and the congressional tasking, the
committee conducted its analysis on the basis that it is not a mission of U. S. BMD systems to
defend against large-scale deliberate nuclear attacks by Russia or China.4 Furthermore, although
not the focus of this study, it is important to recognize that any effective defense of the U. S.
homeland or allies against limited ballistic missile attack, whether the attack or the defense uses
kinetic or directed energy, inherently has the capability, without significant modification, to also
intercept satellites passing within its field of fire. Accordingly, great care should be taken by the
United States in ensuring that negotiations on space agreements not adversely impact missile
defense effectiveness. Specifically, in keeping with the National Space Policy presented to
Congress in 2010, the emphasis in international space agreements should be on establishing
norms of behavior with respect to shared access to space and on limiting and reducing debris
rather than on setting kinematic or functional constraints that would be likely to restrict defense
system effectiveness.
1Biographies for the committee members are provided in Appendix B.
2For brevity, missions (2) and (3) are usually considered together because they so often involve defense against
hostile missiles of similar character, although being defended against for different purposes.
3Any BMD system would provide some inherent capabilities for defense against an accidental or unauthorized
launch of a Russian or Chinese, or for that matter, one owned by another power. However, defense against such
attacks should not drive the design or evaluation of defense concepts, because the greater sophistication (or
numbers) of such an attack would tend to establish unrealistic and perhaps infeasible or unaffordable requirements
compared with those appropriate for defenses focused on the rogue state threat.
4Aside from political and stability effects, such defense is not practical, given the size, sophistication, and
capabilities of Russian and Chinese forces and both countries’ potential to respond to U. S. defense efforts, including
by increasing the size of the attack to the point at which defenses are simply overwhelmed by numbers. The fourth
mission is discussed in greater detail in classified Appendix J).
S-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
BOX S-1
Ballistic Missile Defense Intercept Technology
For purposes of this report, ballistic missile defense intercept can occur in three phases of flight: boost phase,
midcourse phase, and terminal phase. This terminology is defined below:
“Boost-phase intercept” (BPI) will be used exclusively for intercept of the threat missile prior to the end of powered
flight of the main stages of the missile. Intercept during this phase is noteworthy because, if successful, the
missile’s payload cannot reach its intended target. Whether the payload itself survives boost-phase intercept
depends on where on the target missile missile the intercept occurs. The degree of payload shortfall depends on
when during the target missile’s boost phase the intercept occurs. The main challenge associated with boost-phase
intercept is the short time associated with powered flight, typically between 60 and 300 seconds depending on the
missile’s range and propellant type.
“Midcourse intercept” refers to exoatmospheric intercept after threat booster burnout. During this phase, all objects
follow ballistic trajectories under the sole influence of Earth’s gravitational field. The midcourse phase is
noteworthy because it is the longest phase of a missile’s flight (for those missiles that leave the atmosphere), thereby
providing more time for observing and reacting to the threat. However, it is also the phase where decoys may be
most effective because all objects follow ballistic trajectories regardless of their mass. The terms “ascent phase
intercept” and “early intercept” are redundant because they refer to intercept after the end of the boost phase of flight
but prior to apogee, which makes them part of midcourse intercept. Intercepting threat missiles as early as possible
during the midcourse phase increases battle space and defends large footprints from a single forward site, thereby
adding shot opportunities that use interceptors more efficiently.
“Terminal defense intercept” refers to endoatmospheric intercept after the midcourse defense opportunity. The
presence of substantial dynamic forces make this phase unique as far as ballistic missile defense is concerned
because light objects such as decoys, which slow down faster due to atmospheric drag, follow substantially different
trajectories than heavy objects such as reentry vehicles. The altitude at which the transition from midcourse to
terminal defense occurs is somewhat ambiguous, with light decoys being slowed appreciably relative to reentry
vehicles at altitudes between 70 and 100 km and appreciable aerodynamic forces on the reentry vehicle occuring at
altitudes below approximately 40 km.
_____________________________
NOTE: Postboost, predeployment intercept (PBDI) refers to intercept of a missile’s postboost vehicle (PBV) or
payload deployment module, if any, after the main rocket engines burn out and prior to the complete deployment of
multiple objects contained in the missile’s payload (reentry vehicles, decoys, and other countermeasures). This
distinction is important because intercepts during the PBDI phase potentially eliminate some objects depending on
how early in the PBDI phase the intercept occurs, PBVs are more easily detected and tracked, and PBVs may
undergo lower power maneuvers as they deploy their multiple objects. The duration of the PBDI phase depends on
PBV design and mission. However, it can be very or vanishingly short as noted in a recent Defense Science Board
Report entitled Science and Technology Issues of Early Intercept Ballistic Missile Defense Feasibility (September
2011).
S-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE S-1 Layered missile defense terminology.
In conducting its study, the committee received briefings from a wide variety of public
and government sources and reviewed classified reports from the intelligence community and
Department of Defense (DOD), in particular missile defense programs sponsored by the Missile
Defense Agency (MDA).5 Included in these briefings were, among other things, funding data for
U. S. boost-phase and non-boost-phase alternatives (e. g., midcourse and terminal BMD systems).
Figure S-2 displays 20-yr life-cycle costs for the BMD systems (present and proposed) examined
in this report.6 Here, the total estimated costs are broken down into development costs;
acquisition plus military construction (MILCON), combined as procurement costs; operations
and support (O&S) costs; and sunk investments. These costs do not include supporting sensors,
which are discussed in Chapter 4 of this report.
As a starting point for the study, and to force a rigorous assessment of U. S. boost-phase
and non-boost systems, as requested by the congressional tasking, the committee developed
scenarios it believed the United States, and in some cases its allies, partners, and host nations,
would face in each of the four missile defense missions stated in the second paragraph. These
scenarios and missions are congruent with the threats described in the congressional tasking as
well as with the DOD Ballistic Missile Defense Review.7 In particular, as part of its analysis, the
committee examined U. S. ballistic missile defense capabilities against threats from regional
actors such as North Korea and Iran.
5A summary of the committee’s meetings is provided in Appendix C. Acronyms and abbrevitations are listed in
Appendix D.
6Chapters 2, 3, and 4 provide background information and analysis on these present and proposed BMD systems,
including the operational, technical, and cost issues surrounding each. In conducting its analysis, the committee also
developed two BMD systems—the continental United States (CONUS)-based, evolved Ground-Based Midcourse
Defense (GMD) system and the forward-based evolved GMD system—as improvements to the current GMD
system. Ultimately, the committee recommended that the MDA implement an evolutionary approach to the current
GMD system, called GMD-E and discussed in detail in Chapter 5 of this report.
7Department of Defense. 2010. Ballistic Missile Defense Review Report. Washington, D. C., February.
S-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE S-2 20-yr life cycle costs for the BMD systems examined in this report. (1) Where applicable, MILCON
costs included as part of procurement costs; (2) sunk investments based on kinetic energy interceptor heritage; (3)
sunk investment based on Aegis block development upgrade, design, and production heritage of SM-2 Block IV;
(4) CONOPS based on multimission use of retrofitted available F-15Cs and/or F-35s; (5) procurement cost includes
MILCON estimates for recommended missile field and facilities infrastructure construction costs on new
northeastern CONUS site; and (6) sunk investment cost for THAAD does not include separately identified past
funds for AN/TPY-2 radar.
CONTEXT OF STUDY IN TODAY’S ENVIRONMENT
At the outset of the study in 2010, several decisions were taken by the Secretary of
Defense (SECDEF) and reflected in the administration’s defense policies; the decisions can be
summarized as follows:
(1) Termination of the Kinetic Energy Interceptor (KEI) program and conversion of the
Airborne Laser (ABL) program to a research and development activity in recognition
of the operational and technical difficulties of intercepting missiles during the boost
phase of flight.
(2) Replacement of the prior administration’s proposed third site missile defense
deployment in Europe by what is now known as the Phased Adaptive Approach
(PAA).
(3) Termination of work on the multiple kill vehicle (MKV) technology because the
threats anticipated in the next few years are not likely to be accompanied by
penetration aids sophisticated enough to defeat the existing systems.
(4) Emergence of MDA’s “early intercept” strategy aimed at attacking threats during or
shortly after deployment of their payloads but before apogee.
For the reasons described in this report, the committee endorses decision (1) but has
reservations about how (2), (3), and (4) are evolving.
S-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Finally, while the committee sought and received a look into the analyses and rationales
behind MDA-sponsored programs, it used its own independent systems analysis, simulation, and
costing expertise and its expertise in many military and technical areas related to boost-phase
missile defense and non-boost alternatives in order to arrive at its findings and
recommendations.8 The basis for these can be found in the unclassified report and some
additional analysis can be found in the classified annex. The report’s major findings and
recommendations are provided in the next section.
MAJOR FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Findings
The committee’s major findings are divided into two groups: (1) boost-phase systems
and (2) non-boost-phase systems. They are summarized below and then formally articulated.
Boost-Phase Systems
The fundamental problem for boost-phase defense is that the window for intercept is
short and the range of interceptors (whether propelled by kinetic or directed energy) is limited so
that the platform for a boost-phase defense system must be relatively close to the threat trajectory
if intercept is to be possible. Here, the duration of an attacking missile’s boost phase depends on
the type of fuel (solid-propellant rocket motors have significantly shorter burn times than liquid
fuel ones) and the range of the threat missile (longer ranges require longer burn times). For
example, an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) with a liquid fuel rocket motor launched
from central Iran to the U. S. East Coast would have about 250 sec of boost-phase flight (out of a
total flight time of approximately 40 min), whereas an ICBM solid fuel rocket motor launched
from the same location would have about 180 sec of boost-phase flight. Moreover, intercept
must take place not just before burnout of the threat booster but also before it can reach a
velocity that would threaten any area to be protected. For example, since boost-phase intercept
is unlikely to destroy a nuclear warhead, the “debris” would not be just fragments of the
attacking rocket but potentially an intact, armed nuclear weapon.
In addition to the time and range limitations associated with boost-phase defense (i. e., for
a kinetic system, the distance a kinetic interceptor can cover in the time available; for a directed-
energy system, the distance at which a laser beam retains sufficient power and coherence to be
effective), the interceptor platform cannot for its own survivability be so close to the territory of
the adversary as to be vulnerable to perimeter defenses. This constraint on platform location is
particularly restrictive for airborne platforms and ships.
8Four different engagement simulation models are used as part of the committee’s analysis. All of them include
proprietary information, although the models themselves have been validated against National Air and Space
Intelligence Center detailed trajectory models, as well as industry six degree of freedom (DOF) simulations used to
design and analyze ballistic missiles and interceptors. For example, one model—BMDTRADES—used to fly out
threats and interceptors over a detailed oblate rotating Earth can graphically display the resulting footprint coverage
and battle space. Another model, based in part on a rotating spherical Earth simulation, is used to fly out threats and
interceptors from launch through the standard atmosphere using a three-DOF plus vehicle model (two translational
plus one or two rotational). It is capable of graphically displaying the resulting footprint coverage and battle space.
Two other two-body three-DOF plus planar engagement simulations are used to model both threat missiles and
interceptors flying through the standard atmosphere with real controllability constraints, after which they are
compared with the missile models used in the more global models and to cross-check the results of the first two
more complex models. For this study, the committee believes the models are of sufficient detail to access accurately
the capabilities and limitations of BMD systems.
S-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
There is a potentially significant qualification to this pessimistic assessment. In combat
scenarios where an air supremacy has been achieved, it might be possible to maintain airborne
boost-phase interceptors in intercept-effective locations that would not otherwise be feasible.
This could be particularly important where the issue was defending deployed forces or friendly
territory—as would be the case, for example, in a war on the Korean peninsula and in scenarios
where hostile missile launches occur late enough in the war so that an opponent’s air defenses
have been thoroughly suppressed. Similarly, there are some threat trajectories—say, from North
Korea toward Japan or Guam—where it might be feasible to station boost-phase interceptors in
locations where they could be effective.9 For almost all other plausible engagements, boost-
phase intercept is not practical given the limited burn time and the requirement to be close to the
intercept point. In summary, with one or two minor exceptions, land-, sea-, or air-based boost-
phase defense is not feasible when timeline, range, geographical/geo-political, or cost constraints
are taken into account.
Major Finding 1: While technically possible in principle, boost-phase missile defense—
whether kinetic or directed energy, and whether based on land, sea, air, or in space—is not
practical or feasible for any of the missions that the committee was asked to consider. This is
due to the impracticalities associated with space-based boost-phase missile defense (addressed in
Major Finding 2), along with geographical limits on where terrestrial (nonspace) interceptors
would have to be placed and the timeline within which such interceptors must function in order
to defend the intended targets.
Intercept must take place not just before burnout of the threat booster but before it
reaches a velocity that can threaten any area to be protected. Because of the short
burn times of even long-range ballistic missile boosters, the interceptor launch
platform cannot for its own survivability be so close to the territory of an adversary as
to be vulnerable to the adversary’s perimeter defenses, but it must be close enough to
the boost trajectory so that the interceptor can reach the threat missile before it
reaches its desired velocity.
Surface-based boost-phase interceptors are not feasible against a large country like
Iran for missiles of any kind unless the interceptor platforms are based in the southern
Caspian Sea. While it has been suggested that unmanned stealthy aircraft could loiter
inside or close to the borders of an adversary, the committee does not believe it to be
a feasible approach against a country with an effective air defense like Russian S-300
SAMs, in the face of which stealth aircraft will have a limited time of invulnerability
as they maintain station in an environment with a high-density air defense sensor.
Major Finding 2: While space basing for boost-phase defense would in principle solve the
problems of geographical limits that make surface-based boost-phase intercept impractical, the
size and cost of such a constellation system is extremely high and very sensitive to the timeline
in which interceptors must be launched. As a result it is susceptible to countermeasures such as
salvo launches that either delay and reduce its coverage or squander space-based intercepts.
In principle, a constellation of satellites equipped with boost-phase interceptors could
be configured so as always to be geographically in range for an intercept. The
9For example, Aegis with SM-3 IIA on station in the East Sea could be effective in defending Hawaii and is
discussed as one of three potential scenarios for intercepting hostile missiles in the boost phase of flight (see Chapter
2).
S-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
number of satellites required depends, in part, on the burn time and altitude of the
threat missiles. Shorter powered flights of solid-fueled threat missiles require many
more satellites for coverage. Shorter range missiles with their shorter burn times and
lower burnout altitudes cannot be engaged by space-based boost-phase intercepts.
The total life-cycle cost of placing and sustaining the constellation in orbit is at least
an order of magnitude greater than that of any other alternative and impractical for
that reason alone.
Non-Boost-Phase Systems
The formidable difficulties of being able to maintain boost-phase interceptors in the
locations necessary to enable defense against long-range attacks mean that any operationally
feasible defense against such attacks will have to effect intercept after the boost phase is
complete. Moreover, while terminal defenses may provide a useful backup protection to
extremely high value (or limited area) assets, the footprint limitations of terminal defenses mean
that an effective defense will usually have to occur during midcourse. Furthermore, as shown in
some of the engagements analyzed in Chapter 5, at best, early intercept does not occur early
enough to avoid the need for midcourse discrimination.
In short, any practical missile defense system must rely primarily on intercept during the
midcourse phase of flight. The attraction of midcourse (exoatmospheric) defense is that
interceptors at a few sites can protect an entire country or even an entire continent, committing
the first intercepts only after multiple phenomenology attack assessment. Put another way:
Midcourse defense can adapt in real time to defend whatever is threatened and still have
sufficient shot opportunities to deal with imperfections in target designation and with intercept
failures. On the other hand, it must at some point also deal with exoamospheric
countermeasures, which in principle can be light in weight yet credible and easily deployed.
The hard fact is that no practical missile defense system can avoid the need for midcourse
discrimination—that is, the requirement to identify the actual threat objects (warheads) amid the
cloud of material accompanying them in the vacuum of space. This discrimination is not the
only challenge for midcourse defense, but it is the most formidable one, and the midcourse
discrimination problem must be addressed far more seriously if reasonable confidence is to be
achieved.
Decoys are not, of course, the only countermeasures a midcourse defense system must
face. Other possible countermeasures include structured attacks involving simultaneous
launches and/or attacks on key components of the defense, notably its sensors. As the threat
evolves, defenses must adapt to these threats, as well as to increasingly sophisticated decoy-type
countermeasures.10
The art of midcourse discrimination, developed over many decades, does not provide
perfect selection of reentry vehicles. However, by designing a BMD architecture based on the
capabilities described in this report, an adequate level of discrimination performance can—in the
committee’s judgment—be achieved in the near term and provide a reasonable chance of
keeping the United States generally ahead in the contest between countermeasures and counter-
10MDA has programs of record associated with sensor development with emphasis on airborne and space-based
EO/IR, ground-ship-based X-band software, and the development of the SBX. For example, a notional airborne
infrared sensor with a 20 cm diameter could provide precision track data to support surface-based interceptors
provided two platforms are available for stereo tracking, each with LWIR sensors and low noise figures that allow
for cold body detection. Tracking ranges on the order of 1,000 km should be achievable.
S-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
countermeasures over time, at least against emerging missile states like North Korea and Iran.11
In particular, the committee believes that the best approach for addressing the midcourse
discrimination problem is the synergy between X-band radar observations and optical sensors
onboard the interceptors with the proper shoot-look-shoot firing doctrine described below.
The midcourse discrimination issue aside, MDA and the Services appear to be on the
right track for developing BMD systems for countering short-, medium-, and intermediate-range
ballistic missile threats from rogue states directed at the deployed forces of the United States and
its allies. However, while Aegis, Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD), and Patriot
(PAC-3) are well developed and suited to their individual missions against these types of threats,
there has been limited interface among them until recently. The committee is pleased to see that
MDA is closing this gap.
Finally, there has been little evidence either of serious cost-benefit analysis or of systems
analysis and engineering before embarking on new initiatives within MDA. In the committee’s
view, past systems proposed for U. S. boost-phase defense as well as the current GMD system
architecture are classic examples. The concept of spiral development in no way justifies not
defining the objectives and requirements for the desired end state. MDA’s efforts have spawned
an almost “hobby shop” approach, with many false starts on poorly analyzed concepts. For
example, analysis of successful programs with missiles of comparable complexity—that is, with
the comparison costs at a similar point of development maturity and at 2010 dollars—suggests
that the current GMD interceptors are approximately 30 to 50 percent more expensive than they
should be at this point in the program.
Major Finding 3: There is no practical missile defense concept or system operating before
terminal phase for either the U. S. homeland or allies that does not depend on some level of
midcourse discrimination, even in the absence of deliberate decoys or other countermeasures.
The only alternative is to engage all credible threat objects (the Multiple Kill Vehicle program
was such a hedge). Therefore it is important to face the problem of midcourse discrimination
squarely and to maximize the probability of accomplishing it.
Initially the nonthreatening objects may be “unintentional”—for example, spent upper
stages, deployment modules or attitude control modules, separation debris, debris
from unburned fuel, insulation, and other parts of the booster. However, as threat
sophistication increases, the defense is likely to have to deal with purposeful
countermeasures—decoys and other penetration aids and tactics, including salvo
launches and antisimulation devices—that adversaries will have deliberately designed
to frustrate U. S. defenses.
The midcourse discrimination problem must be addressed far more seriously if
reasonable confidence is to be achieved.
Major Finding 4: The synergy between X-band radar observations and concurrent optical
sensor observations on board a properly designed interceptor (which could be a modified
ground-based interceptor) closing on the target complex has not been exploited. The committee
believes a combination of a proper operational concept and firing doctrine taking advantage of
the battle space available for SLS offers the greatest potential for effective discrimination in the
11There is no unequivocal answer to the question of whether a missile defense can work against countermeasures.
It depends on the resources expended by the offense and the defense and the knowledge each has of the other’s
systems. Thus, defense effectiveness against countermeasures inevitably will vary with time as the offense-defense
competition unfolds.
S-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
face of potential future countermeasures. Although it is by no means a certain solution, the
committee believes this approach is not adequately exploited in current U. S. midcourse defense
systems (such as GMD) and needs to be if the United States is to have an effective defense
against limited attacks.
The importance of this three-way synergy—X-band radar observations concurrent
with optical sensor observations on board a properly designed interceptor together
with SLS capability—cannot be overemphasized.
This will require implementing a more realistic and robust program to gather data
from flight tests and experiments (including on flights of U. S. missiles) from the full
range of sensors, and making full use of the extensive data collected from past
experiments to continue developing the applied science from which robust
discrimination techniques and algorithms can be developed.
Major Finding 5: Based on information presented to the committee, it does not appear that
MDA takes into account how the signatures of various threat objects behave when observed
concurrently for several hundred seconds by both interceptor-mounted optical sensors closing on
the threat complex and X-band radar measurements. Moreover, it appears that virtually all of the
effective analytical work at MDA in optical signatures was terminated several years ago,
ostensibly for budget reasons. The Midcourse Space Experiment (MSX) and the High-Altitude
Observatory 2 (HALO 2) programs, for example, provided significant amounts of useful data.
Yet the committee could not find anyone at MDA who could show it those data or explain them
let alone the data from ground-based interceptor flight tests.
Forty years of optical signature data from well-instrumented past and recent flight
tests are lying fallow and unanalyzed with respect to current technological
capabilities. These include programs with acronyms such as designating optical
tracker (DOT), fly along infrared (FAIR), the Homing Overlay Experiment (HOE),
the Queen Match Discrimination Experiment, and others.
While radar and optical midcourse discrimination technologies have been pursued for
years, they have largely been on separate tracks and more in competition rather than
in collaboration.
Major Finding 6: To be credible and effective, a ballistic missile defense system must be
robust even if any of its elements fail to work as planned, whether that failure is due to a failure
of discrimination or to something else. Moreover, a properly configured midcourse defense is
the most cost effective and resilient method of defending the U. S. homeland against ballistic
missile attack. What is needed is a system that is resilient to failure, in particular the failure to
discriminate successfully. This implies making use of SLS doctrine that exploits the potential
battle space. The committee has analyzed the effectiveness of the discrimination capability of
the GMD system and finds that the system can, if it works as designed, deal successfully with the
initial threats from North Korea. However, the current GMD system has been developed in an
environment of limited objectives (e. g., dealing with an early-generation North Korean threat of
very limited numbers and capability) and under conditions where a high value was placed on
getting some defense fielded as quickly as possible, even if its capability was limited and the
system less than fully tested. As a result, the GMD interceptors, architecture, and doctrine have
shortcomings that limit their effectiveness against even modestly improved threats and threats
from countries other than North Korea. Nevertheless, 30 GMD interceptors exist (or soon will),
S-9
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
and they and their support network of sensors—including additional properly chosen and located
and already fully developed ground-based forward X-band radar elements—and communications
could, at an affordable cost and on a timeline consistent with the expected threat, be modified,
emplaced, and employed so as to be far more effective for the homeland defense mission.
The foundation work for these modifications has already been done by MDA.
For example, GMD interceptors require a Block II ground-based interceptor
incorporating KEI-like booster technology having a shorter burn time and a new kill
vehicle with talk-back capability to permit using downlinked information from a
closing kill vehicle.
Major Finding 7: The Aegis ship-based SM-3 Block II interceptors with launch or engage on
remote—both of which capabilities are under development—together with the THAAD and
PAC-3 systems and their elements will provide, where appropriate, adequate coverage for
defense of U. S. and allied deployed forces and of Asian allies.12
With two or three Aegis ashore sites in Europe, that same combination can provide a
layered late midcourse and high-altitude terminal defense for Europe.
No interceptor with fly-out speeds less than 5.0 km/sec based in Poland or Romania
or elsewhere in Europe can engage or interfere with Russia’s nuclear deterrent
ICBMs or submarine-launched ballistic missiles.
Coverage of Israel and other Middle East areas against the anticipated threat will
require additional Aegis and THAAD assets. (Turkey will require its separate
defense using THAAD or the equivalent against shorter-range threats.) These
requirements assume that single-shot defense of most areas is acceptable.
Universal SLS capability, which is desirable for effective discrimination and other
purposes, will require additional sites or terminal defense.
Major Finding 8: The first three phases of the European Phased Adaptive Approach (PAA) are
expected to provide defense for Europe against a limited ballistic missile attack for deployed
U. S. and allied forces within the region and the Middle East, provided the sensor architecture and
the missile defense command and control (C2) center for the European PAA architecture can
implement engage-on-remote capability.
If modestly sophisticated countermeasures are anticipated for the IRBM threat, then
the European PAA will need to include multiple X-band radar and long-range IR
sensors (e. g., ABIR) that can provide concurrent data on IRBM trajectories similar to
the countermeasures proposed for U. S. national missile defense. However, the IR
data will need to come from external sensors because the SM-3 and THAAD kill
vehicles have limited seeker range and limited divert capability. Fortunately, Aegis
and THAAD are both capable of continuous communication between the kill vehicle
and the C2 center.
12In the launch-on-remote concept, the engagement is controlled and in-flight target updates are provided from the
launching ship. The Aegis program is also working to develop an engage-on-remote capability by 2015, whereby
(1) the interceptor can be launched using any available target track and (2) engagement is controlled from and in-
flight target updates can be provided to the interceptor missile from any Aegis AN/SPY-1 or AN/TYP-2 radar. The
committee applauds the MDA’s progress in achieving launch-on-remote capability for Aegis.
S-10
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Europe can be covered with a SLS firing doctrine assuming enough sites are
deployed, where the number of sites required depends on the interceptor speed—for
example, two or three sites would be required if the interceptor speed is greater than
4.0 km/sec.
SLS, when combined with the sensor architecture and C2 center noted above, is
expected to provide a relatively robust defense of Europe against a range of potential
future countermeasures.
Turkey, as a member of NATO, will require separate BMD elements to ensure its
protection. THAAD is probably the most appropriate system for this purpose owing
to the stand-alone capability of its X-band radar and its ability to intercept shorter
range missiles.
Major Finding 8a: Phase IV of the European PAA may not be the best way to improve U. S.
homeland defense.
The speed of the Phase IV interceptor will need to be greater than can be achieved
with a 21-in. missile to avoid being overflown by lofted ICBM trajectories from Iran
if the interceptor is based in northern Europe (Poland).
Major Finding 9: The proposed Precision Tracking and Surveillance System (PTSS) does not
appear to be justified in view of its estimated life-cycle cost versus its contribution to defense
effectiveness. Specifically, the justification provided to the committee for developing this new
space-based sensor system was questionable, and the committee’s analysis shows that its
objective can be better accomplished by deployment of forward-based X-band radars based on
the Army Navy/transportable radar surveillance model 2 (AN/TPY-2) system design at much
lower total-life-cycle cost.
The AN/TPY-2 radar already developed for THAAD and already deployed can be
exploited to provide the required capabilities for all foreseeable defense missions.
Taking advantage of the existing manufacturing base and the learning curve as more
units are built would be a very cost-effective way of supporting the recommendations
in this report.
Major Recommendations
The committee’s major recommendations are divided into two groups: (1) boost-phase
systems and (2) non-boost-phase systems.
Boost-Phase Systems
Major Recommendation 1: The Department of Defense should not invest any more money or
resources in systems for boost-phase missile defense. Boost-phase missile defense is not
practical or cost effective under real-world conditions for the foreseeable future.
All boost-phase intercept (BPI) systems suffer from severe reach-versus-time-
available constraints. This is true for kinetic kill interceptors launched from Earth’s
surface, from airborne platforms, or from space. It is also true for a directed-energy
(laser) weapon in the form of the airborne laser (ABL), where reach is limited by
problems of propagating enough beam over long distances in the atmosphere and
S-11
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
focusing it onto a small spot, even with full use of sophisticated adaptive optical
techniques.
While there may be special cases of a small country such as North Korea launching
relatively slow burning liquid-propellant ICBMs in which some boost-phase
intercepts are possible, the required basing locations for interceptors are not likely to
be politically acceptable.13 This recommendation is not intended to preclude funding
of generic research and development such as the ABL test bed, which is currently
involved in boost-phase intercept, or funding of adaptive optics concepts or advances
in high-power lasers that may be useful for other applications.
Non-Boost-Phase Systems
Major Recommendation 2: The Missile Defense Agency should reinstitute an aggressive,
balanced midcourse discrimination research and development effort focused on the synergy
between X-band radar data and concurrent interceptor observation while closing on the threat.
Such an R&D effort should have the following attributes among others:
Recognition that discrimination is strongly dependent on BMD system architecture,
and known synergies should be exploited.
A continuing program of test and analysis should be implemented to maintain the
technical capacity that will be needed to support an adequate level of discrimination
as new countermeasures are developed and deployed.
A serious effort to gather and understand data from past and future flight tests and
experiments (including flights of U. S. missiles) from the full range of sensors and to
make full use of the extensive data collected from past experiments to generate robust
discrimination techniques and algorithms.
The committee believes that the effort required for success in this endeavor does not
need to be overlarge but does require that high-quality expertise be brought to bear.
The annual budget outlay, if planned correctly, can be modest compared to current
expenditures.
Major Recommendation 3: The Missile Defense Agency should strengthen its systems
analysis and engineering capability in order to do a better job of assessing system performance
and evaluating new initiatives before significant funding is committed. Cost-benefit analysis
should be central to that capability.
In addition to terminating U. S. boost-phase missile defense systems, MDA should
terminate the PTSS unless a more convincing case can be made for its efficacy for the
mission that it is supposed to carry out.
PTSS provides no information that a combination of the Space-Based Infrared
System (SBIRS) and the proposed suite of X-band radars with the interceptor sensors
will not provide better and at lower cost both initially and over the life cycle.
13For example, while a North Korean ICBM aimed at Hawaii and some other Pacific locations could be
intercepted in boost phase by a properly located Aegis ship, the United States cannot realistically or prudently
expect that BPIs intended for defense against North Korean or Iranian attacks can be stationed in Russian or Chinese
airspace or over other nonallied territory (or where overflights of such territory would be necessary to reach on-
station locations), at least short of a full resolution of Russian and Chinese concerns about U. S. missile defense and
agreement on extensive cooperation in such defense.
S-12
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Moreover, as proposed, PTSS contributes little if anything to midcourse
discrimination.
Major Recommendation 4: As a means to defend deployed U. S. forces and allies from short-,
medium-, and intermediate-range ballistic missile threats, the Missile Defense Agency and the
Services should continue investing in non-boost systems such as Aegis, THAAD, and PAC-3,
with continued attention to architecture integration of sensors with shooters (sometimes referred
to as an integrated battle command system, or IBCS), specifically to implement launch-on-
remote (LOR) and engage-on-remote (EOR) firing doctrines.
EOR is essential for effective coverage of Europe from a small number—say, two or
three—of interceptor sites.
Inputs to the IBCS already include those from Defense Support Program (DSP),
SBIRS, and upgraded UHF early warning radars. Maximum use should be made of
these data to relieve X-band radars of unnecessary volume or fan search functions,
permitting them to concentrate radar resources on tracking and discrimination at the
longer ranges permitted when properly cued to the targets. This involves little or no
new investment. Data latency is a potential problem for the IBCS that should not be
ignored.
Major Recommendation 5: As a means to provide adequate coverage for defense of the U. S.
homeland against likely developments in North Korea and Iran over the next decade or two at an
affordable and efficient 20-yr life-cycle cost, the Missile Defense Agency should implement an
evolutionary approach to the Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system, as
recommended in this report.
Chapter 5 recommends an evolutionary path from the present GMD system to a
system having substantially greater capability and a lower cost than a simple
expansion of the present GMD system. The recommended path builds on existing
developments and technologies working together to make a more effective system.
The concepts are not new and have been well known for at least 40 years. Existing
advances in optical and radar technology will enable its realization.
The evolutionary approach would employ smaller, lower cost, faster burning, two-
stage interceptors building on development work by MDA under the KEI program
carrying heavier more capable kill vehicles (KVs).
The evolutionary approach would employ much longer concurrent threat observation
by both X-band radars and the interceptor KV’s onboard sensor over the entire
engagement. The importance of the synergy between these concurrent observations
together with SLS battle space in maximizing midcourse discrimination effectiveness
cannot be overemphasized.
An additional interceptor site with the new evolved GBI in CONUS together with the
recommended radar additions provides SLS coverage of virtually the entire United
States and Canada against the sort of threat that can prudently be expected to emerge
from North Korea or Iran over the coming decade or so. The recommended evolution
would add one additional site in the United States in the northeast, together with
additional X-band radars to more effectively protect the eastern United States and
Canada, particularly against Iranian ICBM threats should they emerge.
S-13
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
This improved capability obviates the need for early intercept from bases in Europe,
unless they are required for European defense.
Defense of Hawaii should be provided by Aegis with launch-on-remote capability:
THAAD would provide a second intercept opportunity as backup for the Aegis
engagement. Hawaii is very small target area for threats from North Korea, Iran, or
any other country and can be covered by one Aegis ship located west of the islands.
By contrast, modifying the GMD system to provide effective defense of Hawaii
against an evolved threat would add substantial complexity and cost.
Maximize the opportunity for observing the threat complex during most of the threat
trajectory until intercept. Addition of stacked TPY 2 radars are recommended for this
purpose.
Make effective use of the high-accuracy data from SBIRS to cue forward X-band
radar and concurrent IR sensors on the interceptor kill vehicle, which together
contribute most of the discrimination capability.
The ability to create, communicate, and interpret target object maps (TOMs) among
the radar, the battle manager, and the interceptor during the entire engagement—
typically hundreds of seconds for a midcourse intercept—increases the probability of
successful discrimination. The resulting TOMs with object rankings should be
exchanged frequently with the interceptor kill vehicle during its fly-out. This
exchange requires taking advantage of the radar’s large aperture and power to close
that communication link over longer distances. The TOM’s data exchange ability
builds on the capabilities demonstrated by programs such as HOE and ERIS and
additionally builds on the MDA Integrated Flight Test Plan for GMD, Aegis, and
THAAD interceptor that uses sensor elements with the addition of downlinks from
the interceptor to the BMC3 element.
S-14
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
1
Introduction
BRIEF HISTORY OF BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE
The potential value of defense systems deployed forward, near the launch areas of hostile
ballistic missiles, was studied in the mid-1960s almost as soon as ballistic missiles were first
deployed.1 In particular, forward-based air- and sea-launched defense systems were evaluated
and a space-based scheme called the Ballistic Missile Boost Intercept (BAMBI) was even
proposed.
The Nike X System, which eventually led to the Sentinel and Safeguard programs,
evolved from air defense missiles that were deemed the most realistic solution to defense of the
continental United States (CONUS). The later systems consisted of radar-command-guided
Spartan area interceptors designed to engage threats above the atmosphere, as well as radar-
command-guided Sprint terminal interceptors (with very high acceleration) that were launched
after atmospheric filtering of light decoys. While Sentinel was aimed at defending population
and infrastructure, the system evolved into Safeguard when the objective became to defend land-
based retaliatory forces.
The Safeguard program was declared operational and deployed at Grand Forks, North
Dakota, at about the time the Antiballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty between the former Soviet
Union and the United States was signed, but it was dismantled 2 years later. In addition to being
susceptible to certain countermeasures, the Safeguard program was meant to detonate defensive
nuclear warheads overhead to prevent enemy nuclear detonations in the United States, which did
not engender support for it.
Even before the Safeguard program was deployed and then dismantled, the U. S. Army’s
Advanced Ballistic Missile Defense Agency (ABMDA) began to exploit the emerging long-
wave infrared sensor technology that allowed detecting and tracking objects against the cold
space background. Studies conducted in the mid- to late 1960s defined midcourse defense
options based on interceptors with long-wave infrared sensors capable of detecting potential
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) threats thousands of kilometers away on their ballistic
trajectories, observing them for more than 100 sec while closing on the threat, thereby
maximizing the opportunity for discriminating warheads from countermeasures and other objects
in the threat complex and finally homing on the object that posed the most credible threat to
intercept it. Simulations in 1969 lent confidence to the notion that this optical homing could be
accomplished with sufficient accuracy to achieve a direct hit, thereby destroying the target by the
force of the collision, at closing velocities approaching or exceeding 10 km/sec. At the same
time, technology was dramatically improving the ability to track rocket boosters from space and
predict their trajectories with handover volumes compatible with the acquisition-and-divert
capabilities of the interceptors. With a moderate-sized onboard long-wave infrared (LWIR)
track (while scan or staring mosaic sensor uncapped once above 80 km altitude), the interceptor
could view the threat against the deep space background as it closed in and could thus search and
acquire individual objects hundreds of miles away, typically about one third the range of the
threat missile. Moreover, the same sensor could be used to home on the target once it was
1For additional reading, see Ashton B. Carter and David V. Schwartz, 1984, Ballistic Missile Defense, Brookings
Institution Press, Washington, D. C.
1-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
designated to achieve miss distances consistent with nonnuclear kill. This work led to flight
experiments for verification, but because of the ABM treaty, more than 10 years elapsed before a
technology flight experiment—called the Homing Overlay Experiment—was initiated that led to
the successful intercept of an ICBM reentry vehicle (RV) launched from Vandenberg Air Force
Base in California in 1984. This experiment was followed by the Exoatmospheric Reentry
Interceptor System (ERIS), which reduced the size of the kill vehicle (KV) to a more operational
configuration that successfully intercepted in 1991. While all of these experimental interceptors
had, in varying degrees, the onboard processing to track and discriminate among tens of objects,
including celestial objects, in the field of view, there was still concern about the ease of creating
relatively lightweight countermeasures that would be effective above the atmosphere.
In 2001, the National Missile Defense (NMD) program transitioned to the Ground-Based
Midcourse Defense (GMD) system and was directed to be deployed by 2004. It is currently
emplaced at Fort Greely, Alaska. The attraction of midcourse (exoatmospheric) defense is that
interceptors at a few sites can protect targets anywhere in the entire country, committing the
earliest intercepts only after assessing an attack with multiple phenomenology. Put another way,
in principle, it can adapt in real time to defend against whatever is threatened and still have
sufficient shot opportunities to deal with imperfections in target designation and intercept
failures. On the other hand, it must at some point also deal with exoatmospheric
countermeasures, which in principle can be light in weight yet credible and are easily deployed.
The midcourse discrimination controversy has contributed to interest in the pursuit of boost-
phase defense.
EVOLVING BALLISTIC MISSILE THREATS
Surface-to-surface ballistic missiles have proliferated in recent years. Today, many
countries beside Russia and China possess such missiles. These countries include several that
are hostile to the United States, notably Iran, North Korea, and Syria, and several that are not
very stable. While the number of countries deploying ballistic missiles is not expected to
increase dramatically in the next decade, there is a possibility that other countries whose
relations with the United States are problematic could acquire them in the near future. More
importantly, countries that already possess ballistic missiles are likely to improve their systems
in terms of number, capability, and technological sophistication. For the purposes of this report,
the committee’s analysis focused on North Korea and Iran.
So far no countries other than Russia and China (and U. S. allies such as the United
Kingdom and France) have ballistic missiles of intercontinental range, although a number have
space launch programs that could, in principle, be adapted for ICBM purposes. Moreover, both
Iran and North Korea have deployed missiles capable of striking U. S. allies and friends and U. S.
forward-deployed forces, and they are working on nuclear weapons with which to arm them and
on missiles with still longer ranges.
In the case of Iran, while the regime’s long-term goals in its pursuit of ballistic missile
development are unclear, it seems likely that deterrence of conventional (or nuclear) attacks on
its territory and coercion of its neighbors within the Middle East are two of those goals. The
growing inventory of older, liquid-propellant shorter-range missiles is a threat primarily to Iran’s
closest neighbors, but the appearance longer-range liquid- and solid-propellant ballistic missiles,
some with multiple stages, is a harbinger of longer-range threats to come.
Perhaps most important to this study is the rapid development of Iran’s indigenous solid-
propellant missile capability. The new solid-propellant ballistic missile has an estimated range
of approximately 2,000 km. All of Israel and the Arabian peninsula are within range of such a
1-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
missile, as shown in Figure 1-1.2 Here, the smaller circle represents the rotating Earth coverage
of this new solid-propellant ballistic missile, or of a 2,000 km-range variant of the Shahab-3.3
Iran is working to develop larger solid rocket motors that could soon show up as two- or three-
stage IRBMs. The larger circle in Figure 1-1 shows that a notional three-stage missile
employing Iran’s currently-demonstrated solid-propellant technology could reach approximately
5,600 km, thus threatening virtually all of Europe, including the United Kingdom, the Eurasian
landmass, and much of northern Africa. To the southeast it would reach almost to the straits of
Malacca andconsiderably beyond Diego Garcia. With this capability, there may be little need to
add ICBM capability to dissuade U. S. or NATO intervention to thwart Iran’s ambitions.
North Korea is a somewhat different story compared to Iran. To date, it has shown little
interest in long-range solid-propellant missiles, instead focusing on building bigger and more
capable liquid-propellant systems. While some view the Taepo Dong 2 as a potential threat to
the United States, the committee thinks this is unlikely. A more immediate threat is a new 3,200
km IRBM North Korea is developing that can threaten Japan, Guam, and Okinawa—all staging
areas for a U. S. response to aggressive behavior by North Korea.4
An open question is whether Iran’s solid propellant capability will be shared with North
Korea and others in the way that liquid-propellant technology has flowed in the other direction.
In this study, the committee has tried to look at the broad spectrum of threats, current or that may
emerge over several years, rather than parsing the details of shifting projections of specific
programs. While there is uncertainty as to the pace of either state’s progress, prudence dictates
that the United States assume, in the absence of verifiable evidence to the contrary, that both
North Korea and Iran will eventually have ballistic missiles capable of reaching CONUS with
nuclear weapons, and that both will attempt to adapt their programs to offset U. S. defense
efforts. Generic but representative examples of potential ballistic missiles, available in the open
FIGURE 1-1 Hypothetical Range of Iranian ballistic missiles.
2Figure 1-1 was generated from the committee’s analysis using Google Earth. ©2011 Google, Map Data©2011
Tele Atlas.
3Department of Defense. 2010. Ballistic Missile Defense Review Report, February, pp. 5-6.
4Ibid, p. 5.
1-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
literature, and actual threat assessments from the intelligence community are provided in
classified Appendix F, which accompanies this unclassified report.5
The principal hurdles in developing a true ICBM for Iran and North Korea to overcome
are achieving reliability and a sufficient range, developing a workable RV, and producing a
nuclear (or conceivably chemical or biological) weapon that can be used in an ICBM RV.
Estimates of how long it will be before either country first tests an ICBM vary greatly, from a
few months to a decade or more. Of course, a first test, even if successful—North Korea’s initial
tests of a Taepo Dong 2 nominally for space launch failed—would not be equivalent to
deploying an operational system, which could take additional years. Nor is it clear how soon
either country could develop a workable RV and nuclear warhead for their missiles. However,
the consensus of the intelligence community is that both countries could have an operational
ICBM capability within a decade.
Based on the information presented to the committee, it appears any ICBM that Iran or
North Korea could deploy initially would be relatively unsophisticated. However, the U. S.
intelligence community expects that most of the countries that are developing ballistic missiles
will improve their capabilitiesthese missiles over time. In addition to their indigenous
technological capacity, Iran and North Korea—and others seeking ballistic missile capability—
are likely to be able to tap into one another’s technologies and the technologies of other missile-
possessing countries, whether with those countries’ consent or otherwise.
In addition to increasing survivability and effectiveness of their ballistic missile force by
measures such as mobile basing and increased accuracy, emerging ballistic missile states will
likely make other improvements of significance for U. S. missile defense efforts, notably the
adoption of solid-propellant systems, more energetic missiles, and the development and
integration of countermeasures against missile defense systems. So far the countermeasure
efforts of both appear to be directed against theater-level terminal defenses, but some—such as
multiple near-simultaneous launches, which both Iran and North Korea have demonstrated—
would also have potential against defenses designed to deal with longer-range threats.
Our nation’s ability to anticipate and understand the details of an Iranian or North Korean
ICBM (or other missiles) would depend substantially on the extent of their flight testing. While
both countries are likely to do some testing—both to confirm the performance of their systems
and in the hopes of gaining political advantage by exhibiting their prowess—they are unlikely to
follow the extensive testing practices of the United States and the former Soviet Union during
the Cold War or those of China.
Although Russia and China will certainly maintain and modernize their strategic nuclear
arsenals, U. S. policy states that missile defense is not intended or designed to counter those
forces—and any attempt to do so would be an expensive and destabilizing failure. Accordingly,
and consistent with its congressional tasking, this study does not consider the ability to defend
against Russian or Chinese strategic forces as an evaluation criterion for proposed missile
defense systems.
In addition to developing its strategic deterrent, however, China is also very active in
developing conventionally armed tactical and theater missile capabilities for “anti-access, area-
denial” missions. Such missile systems could pose serious threats to U. S. allies and U. S. power
projection forces in the western Pacific. A case of particular concern—though far from the only
one—is the development of a much publicized anti-ship ballistic missile, with a maneuvering
conventional warhead designed to attack naval forces at sea. Dealing with this potential threat is,
5Some believe theater ballistic missiles launched by ships is a serious threat, particularly for nonstate actors, and
there may be potential responses that would involve intercepting missiles.
1-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
in contrast to the strategic force question, very much a potential mission for U. S. missile
defense.6
BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE MISSIONS AND SYSTEMS EXAMINED
The congressional tasking for this study requested an assessment of the concepts and
systems for U. S. boost-phase missile defense in comparison with non-boost ballistic missile
alternatives. It calls for attention to the systems for two purposes: (1) countering short-range
ballistic missile (SRBM), medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM), and intermediate-range
ballistic missile (IRBM) threats from rogue states to the deployed forces of the United States and
its allies; and (2) defending the territory of the United States against limited ballistic missile
attack.7
To provide a context for analysis of present and proposed U. S. boost-phase and non-
boost concepts and systems, the committee considered the following to be the missions for
ballistic missile defense (BMD): (1) protection of the U. S. homeland against nuclear attacks,
attacks involving other weapons of mass destruction (WMD), or conventional ballistic missile
attacks; (2) protection of U. S. forces, including military bases, in theaters of operation against
ballistic missile attacks armed with WMD or conventional munitions; and (3) protection of U. S.
allies, partners, and host nations against ballistic-missile-delivered WMD and conventional
weapons.8 A fourth mission, protection of the U. S. homeland, allies, and partners against
accidental or unauthorized launch, was considered as a collateral benefit of any ballistic mission
defense but not as a goal that drives system requirements.9 Consistent with U. S. policy and the
congressional tasking, the committee conducted its analysis on the basis that it is not a mission of
U. S. BMD systems to defend against large-scale, deliberate nuclear attacks by Russia or China.10
BMD intercept can, in principle, be accomplished in any of the three phases of flight of
the target missile: boost phase, midcourse phase (which can in turn be subdivided into early,
ascent, and postapogee or decent phases), and terminal phase. Further elaboration of this
terminology is provided in Box 1-1.
Figure 1-2 displays the present and proposed U. S. BMD systems for countering SRBM,
MRBM, IRBM, and ICBM threats in the context of their phases of flight.
In addressing the congressional tasking, the committee examined a wide range of present and
proposed BMD systems, along with their supporting sensors. The BMD systems examined in
this report are shown in Table 1-1, where they are displayed in terms of their applicability to a
given protected area and mission (i. e., protecting the U. S. homeland, allies, or U. S. forces) and to
a given layer of defense (terminal-, midcourse-, or boost-phase defense). The programs of
record for the particular defense systems are described in Chapters 2 and 3. In addition, the
committee examined two other defense systems—CONUS-based evolved GMD (denoted as
6Department of Defense. 2010. Ballistic Missile Defense Review Report, February, p. 7.
7The term “systems” is used in place of “concepts and systems” throughout this report, recognizing that the term
can be either existing or proposed.
8For brevity, missions (2) and (3) are usually considered together because they so often involve defense against
hostile missiles of similar character although being defended against for different purposes.
9Any BMD system would provide some inherent capabilities for defense against accidental or unauthorized
launch of a Russian or Chinese missile or, for that matter, one owned by another power. However, defense against
such attacks should not drive the design or evaluation of defense concepts, because the greater sophistication (or
numbers) of such an attack would tend to establish unrealistic and perhaps infeasible or unaffordable requirements
compared to those appropriate for defenses focused on the rogue state threat.
10Aside from political and stability effects, such defense is not practical, given the size, sophistication, and
capabilities of Russian and Chinese forces and both countries’ potential to respond to U. S. defense efforts, including
by increasing the size of the attack to the point at which defenses are simply overwhelmed by numbers.
1-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
GMD-E in Chapter 5) and Forward-Based Evolved GMD—that resulted from its analysis and
simulation work, where it found significant weaknesses in the current systems.
While the committee had access to classified information provided by the Missile
Defense Agency on its programs of record, the committee chose to develop a set of notional
threat missiles, notional interceptor designs and notional sensors to explore the basic physical
limitations of missile defense system performance, with the understanding that a public report
was not only requested by Congress but also helps improve public understanding of ballistic
missile defense issues. As such, the analysis included in this unclassified report (as distinct from
the classified appendices) is based on illustrative calculations that, in the committee’s view,
reasonably capture various missile defense architecture tradeoffs. None of these calculations use
classified threat missiles characteristics or classified system specifications for U. S. missile
defense assets.
BOX 1-1
Ballistic Missile Defense Intercept Technology
For purposes of this report, ballistic missile defense intercept can occur in three phases of flight: boost phase,
midcourse phase, and terminal phase. This terminology is defined below:
“Boost-phase intercept” (BPI) will be used exclusively for intercept of the threat missile prior to the end of
powered flight of the main stages of the missile. Intercept during this phase is noteworthy because, if successful,
the missile’s payload cannot reach its intended target. Whether the payload itself survives boost-phase intercept
depends on where on the target missile missile the intercept occurs. The degree of payload shortfall depends on
when during the target missile’s boost phase the intercept occurs. The main challenge associated with boost-
phase intercept is the short time associated with powered flight, typically between 60 and 300 seconds depending
on the missile’s range and propellant type.
“Midcourse intercept” refers to exoatmospheric intercept after threat booster burnout. During this phase, all
objects follow ballistic trajectories under the sole influence of Earth’s gravitational field. The midcourse phase is
noteworthy because it is the longest phase of a missile’s flight (for those missiles that leave the atmosphere),
thereby providing more time for observing and reacting to the threat. However, it is also the phase where decoys
may be most effective because all objects follow ballistic trajectories regardless of their mass. The terms “ascent
phase intercept” and “early intercept” are redundant because they refer to intercept after the end of the boost
phase of flight but prior to apogee, which makes them part of midcourse intercept. Intercepting threat missiles as
early as possible during the midcourse phase increases battle space and defends large footprints from a single
forward site, thereby adding shot opportunities that use interceptors more efficiently.
“Terminal defense intercept” refers to endoatmospheric intercept after the midcourse defense opportunity. The
presence of substantial dynamic forces make this phase unique as far as ballistic missile defense is concerned
because light objects such as decoys, which slow down faster due to atmospheric drag, follow substantially
different trajectories than heavy objects such as reentry vehicles. The altitude at which the transition from
midcourse to terminal defense occurs is somewhat ambiguous, with light decoys being slowed appreciably
relative to reentry vehicles at altitudes between 70 and 100 km and appreciable aerodynamic forces on the reentry
vehicle occuring at altitudes below approximately 40 km.
_____________________________
NOTE: Postboost, predeployment intercept (PBDI) refers to intercept of a missile’s postboost vehicle (PBV) or
payload deployment module, if any, after the main rocket engines burn out and prior to the complete deployment
of multiple objects contained in the missile’s payload (reentry vehicles, decoys, and other countermeasures). This
distinction is important because intercepts during the PBDI phase potentially eliminate some objects depending
on how early in the PBDI phase the intercept occurs, PBVs are more easily detected and tracked, and PBVs may
undergo lower power maneuvers as they deploy their multiple objects. The duration of the PBDI phase depends
on PBV design and mission. However, it can be very or vanishingly short as noted in a recent Defense Science
Board Report entitled Science and Technology Issues of Early Intercept Ballistic Missile Defense Feasibility
(September 2011).
1-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 1-2 Notional ballistic missile defense (BMD) systems against short-range ballistic missile, medium-range
ballistic missile, intermediate-range ballistic missile, and intercontinental ballistic missile threats. In this figure, all
notional BMD systems are illustrated independent of their operational or developmental status. As this figure
shows, numerous BMD systems have been proposed and considered for boost- and ascent-phase intercept in an
attempt to build a layered defense system. PAC-3, Patriot advanced capability 3; ABI, airborne laser interceptor;
GBI, ground-based interceptor.
1-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE 1-1 BMD Systems Examined in This Report in Terms of Their Potential Mission Applicability
Supporting
Protected Area Terminal Midcourse Ascent Boost Sensors
Homeland THAAD GBI SM-3 Block IIB SBI DSP/SBIRS
ALHK MKV KEI ABL UEWR
SBI SBI KEI AN/TPY-2
KEI ALHK ALHK AN/SPY-1
SBX
STSS
PTSS
ABIR
Allies SM-2 Block IV SM-3 Block I SM-3 Block IIA ABL DSP/SBIRS
PAC-3 Two-stage GBI SM-3 Block IIB ALHK AN/TPY-2
THAAD SM-3 Block II KEI AN/SPY-1
MEADS THAAD ALHK STSS
PTSS
ABIR
Space-ISR
A/B ISR
Forces SM-2 Block IV SM-3 Block I SM-3 Block IIA ABL DSP/SBIRS
PAC-3 SM-3 Block II ALHK ALHK AN/TPY-2
THAAD THAAD AN/SPY-1
MEADS STSS
PTSS
ABIR
RQ-4
MQ-9
NOTE: blue, operational; green, in development; purple, being considered; red, inactive, terminated, or redirected.
ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT
Current policy guidance for missile defense is provided in three DOD reports—the 2010
Quadrennial Defense Review, the 2010 Nuclear Posture Review, and the 2010 Ballisic Missile
Defense Report, with the last report calling for limited but effective missile defense of the U. S.
homeland, of U. S. deployed forces abroad, and of the host nations for those forces. In addition,
as part of U. S. policy of extended deterrence, the last of the three reports calls for cooperation
with allies to provide a defense umbrella against belligerent states, particularly North Korea and
Iran, that are hostile to the collective interests of the United States and its friends and allies on
which it depends.
The title of this report, Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense, underscores the four
primary objectives in meeting the congressional tasking. One is to provide a sound basis for
resolving once and for all some of the claims for BMD systems (including sensors): Do present
and proposed ballistic missile defense systems offer capability and capacity to handle situations
beyond those constituted by an unrealistically constrained view of the threat? Given the
kinematics and time constraints of the engagement problem, are intercepts realistically
achievable? The second objective is to independently assess from a user’s perspective the
effectiveness and utility of the BMD systems being fielded as well as those being contemplated
for future deployment. The third, as per the statement of task, is to examine the resource
requirements for each BMD capability in relation to its mission utility. This resource
examination is based on currently available program cost data as well as on historical cost data
for systems with similar elements and takes into consideration realistic, achievable concepts of
1-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
operations. The final objective is to propose a way forward for U. S. missile defense efforts,
including midcourse discrimination.
The chapters of the committee’s unclassified report are organized as follows: Chapter 2
provides the committee’s assessment of systems for U. S. boost-phase missile defense. Chapter 3
addresses non-boost alternatives. Chapter 4 compares the various systems in terms of their
utility, maturity, and cost. Chapter 5 recommends a path forward, including those activities that
in the committee’s judgment should be redirected or terminated and the various supporting
sensors that will be required. The committee believes systems engineering and analysis need
improvement and that the current ballistic missile defense capability for U. S. homeland
defense—the GMD system—should evolve to improve its overall effectiveness. The committee
also produced a separate classified annex, which does not modify any of the report’s findings or
recommendations but provides supporting material and analyses employing classified data.
1-9
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
2
U. S. Boost-Phase Defense
BACKGROUND
One of the primary perceived benefits of boost-phase defense is the ability to shoot down
a missile during its powered phase, when it presents a bright plume signature and before it
disperses its payload and countermeasures, thereby clearly identifying the target to be destroyed.
This potential to overcome the midcourse discrimination problem has been among the reasons
for interest in the pursuit of boost-phase defense.
The difficulty is that the boost-phase interceptor (BPI) has to be within range of a point at
which it can intercept the target when launch occurs and must be able to respond with a very
short action time. This turns out to be much easier said than done. Since the time from detection
of a hostile launch until it completes boost is often as little as a minute and, even for slower
burning liquid-fueled intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) is unlikely to exceed 250 sec,
any boost-phase intercept—accomplished kinetically or by directed energy—must be launched
after detection from a platform that is within the range and action time of the interceptor,
essentially intercepting before “booster cut-off” of the hostile missile.
While it sounds like a good idea, boost-phase defense presents a unique set of challenges.
For starters, whether a solid or liquid rocket motor is used to propel the hostile missile, the boost-
phase timeline is very short. In a gross sense, the intercept process must first determine if the
launch in fact is a hostile missile and, if it is, determine its trajectory. Then the vehicle providing
the “kill” function—known as the kill vehicle (KV)—must acquire and shoot at the target. Here,
detection range and kill range capability must be considered.
Ground- and ship-based, manned and unmanned aircraft as well as space-based
interceptor platforms have all been proposed, but either the interceptor platform has to be so
close to the threat launch point as to be vulnerable to attack itself, or the velocity of the
intercepting projectile has to be very great. The latter is one reason for the interest in using
directed-energy (speed of light) weapons for boost-phase interecept.
Today’s proposed boost-phase systems originated in the Strategic Defense Initiative era’s
research programs. In more recent years, considerable effort has been expended in the
development of an in-flight directed-energy platform—a heavily modified Boeing 747-400F
airplane. Another option is destroying missiles on their launch pads prior to a suspected launch;
this could have grave political consequences should an “innocent” missile be destroyed on the
pad.
While boost-phase defense has been advocated as the most efficient way to deal with
fractionated payloads and exoatmospheric (midcourse) penetration aids, it is extremely sensitive
to assumptions about threat booster characteristics. Over time, boost-phase defense tends to be
renamed ascent-phase defense when the kinematic realities set in. In fact, ascent-phase defense
is code for engagement in the postboost or early midcourse phases of flight.
The limitations and complications of a surface-based boost-phase defense lie primarily in
the concepts of operations (CONOPS), policy, time, and geography. Since the timelines for
engagement in the boost-phase are extremely short, the on-site commander must have
authorization from the National Command Authority to launch an interceptor immediately after a
2-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
threat missile has been detected.1 Also, access must be gained to countries adjacent to the threat
country in order to position a boost-phase system close enough, and at the correct geometries, to
successfully engage the threat missile. Finally, boost-phase systems are only effective against
countries that do not have large enough landmasses to allow them to launch missiles from deep
within their territory.
The airborne laser is designed to deliver energy at the speed of light to perform the boost-
phase intercept mission. Space-based lasers were also pursued in the past. Virtually no fly-out
time is involved, and the beam agility is a function only of how fast the pointing optics can be
repositioned. While laser weapons sound like the obvious answer, the energy that a laser can
deliver on a target is limited by the power available and the aperture of the device. Atmospheric
effects disturb the beam. Much has been accomplished in advancing the pointing and tracking
capabilities and the adaptive optics to maintain beam quality, but some fundamental limitations
remain.
PROPOSED SYSTEMS
The recently redirected airborne laser (ABL) program was one of two boost-phase
systems under development. While the ABL program came from over two decades of military
laser development, it could not provide an operationally useful boost-phase capability, partly
because the inherent range limitations of the atmospheric propagation meant that the Boeing
747-400F would need to operate in hostile airspace. An alternative approach has been to develop
a kinetic kill vehicle (KKV) for boost-phase defense by harnessing the successful investments
the United States has made over the past several decades for the purpose of midcourse defense,
although a KKV for this purpose would have to be much more agile than a KKV for midcourse
defense. The Kinetic Energy Intercept (KEI) program was undertaken for that reason. In
principle, boost-phase kinetic interceptors could be launched from land-, sea-, air-, or space-
based platforms. However, the efficacy of such interceptors is uncertain. In the following
section the committee provides additional information on the U. S. boost-phase systems
examined in this report, as called for in the congressional tasking. Specifically, the KEI and
ABL programs and other existing boost-phase technology demonstration programs are first
described and then analyzed.
Kinetic Energy Interceptor
The KEI program was initiated in 2002 by the Missile Defense Agency (MDA) based on
a recommendation by the Defense Science Board that a boost-phase intercept capability be
developed with higher average velocity (high v and high acceleration) missiles to enhance
bo
ballistic missile defense and as an alternative to the ABL program.2 The Office of the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy also found that a boost-phase intercept capability was required
for affordability reasons. Furthermore, the ABM Treaty had recently been abrogated, making it
possible to develop and deploy such a system. MDA developed a capabilities-based Request for
Proposal for a transportable, ground-based boost-phase interceptor system and presented it to
industry in December 2002.
The KEI program was originally funded as a $4.6 billion (in then-year dollars), 8-year
development and test boost-phase system using a modified SM-3 seeker and an Exoatmospheric
Kill Vehicle Divert and Attitude Control System (EKV DACS) for the KV. Immediately after
the contract had been awarded, however, the funding for KEI was significantly reduced and
government requirements were added. The mission was expanded in 2004 to include not only
1Even if the weapons release delay is assumed to be zero, the range limits make boost-phase defense infeasible.
2Sean Collins, Missile Defense Agency, “Kinetic Energy Interceptor (KEI) Briefing to the National Academy of
Sciences,” presentation to the committee, January 14, 2010.
2-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
boost-phase intercepts but also ascent-phase (prior to countermeasure deployment) and
midcourse intercepts.
The KEI program was terminated in 2009, just before a planned booster flight test.
According to MDA, the threat had evolved to the point where the expected capability of the KEI
system was inconsistent with the strategy for countering rogue nation threats.3 It is also possible
that extremely high costs and delays played a role in termination of the program. By that time,
the KEI program had experienced mission changes coupled with technical difficulties, which led
to cost growth. The projected cost to complete the contract almost doubled, from $4.6 billion to
$8.9 billion (also in then-year dollars). In addition, the development schedule, originally 5½
years, was projected to take 14-16 years to complete. Over the course of the program, the
average unit cost of a KEI interceptor had also increased, from $25 million to over $50 million
(in then-year dollars). Prior to termination of the program, the mitigation of technical issues had
delayed the first prototype booster flight test date (established in 2007) by over a year.
As shown in Figure 2-1, the KEI system consisted of a BMC2 Component, Mobile
Launcher, and Interceptor All Up Round. KEI had no organic sensors but had direct access to
overhead IR sensors and indirect access to other overhead national asset capabilities and to
BMDS ground sensors when available.
FIGURE 2-1 KEI system integration. BMDS, ballistic missile defense system; CNIP, C2BMC network interface
processor; JNIC, Joint National Integration Center; ROE, rules of engagement. SOURCE: Craig van Schilfgaarde,
David Theisen, Steve Rowland, and Guy Reynard, Northrop Grumman Corporation, “An Assessment of Concepts
and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives: Northrop Grumman
Perspective,” presentation to the committee, July 13, 2010. Courtesy of Northrop Grumman Corporation.
3Sean Collins, Missile Defense Agency, “Kinetic Energy Interceptor (KEI) Briefing to the National Academy of
Sciences,” presentation to the committee, January 14, 2010.
2-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The KEI fire unit consisted of redundant BMC2 systems that received sensor input,
calculated the fire control solution, and communicated with the interceptor before and during
flight. The mobile transporter erector launcher (TEL) transported and launched one round per
launcher. It was transportable by C-17 or C-5A aircraft. The interceptor component was a 40-
inch diameter, two-stage solid rocket. It carried a third-stage rocket motor (TSRM) in the
payload that was used when additional velocity was required. The KV was a derivative of the
SM-3 (two-color seeker) and the EKV DACS. It would have been capable in the boost, ascent,
and midcourse intercept regions.
The CONOPS for the KEI system was very much the same as the CONOPS for tactical
air and missile defense systems currently employed by the U. S. Army and the U. S. Navy. The
land-based system was mobile and transportable by U. S. Air Force aircraft. The CONOPS
called for KEI batteries to be garrisoned at continental United States (CONUS) locations until
needed for national defense or defense of an allied country. A fire unit consisting of command
and control units and 10 missile launchers with their associated transport vehicles would be
transported to the theater of operations. The fire unit would move to its combat position and be
emplaced. Emplacement time was estimated at approximately 3 hr. The fire unit commander
would receive his rules of engagement (ROE) from his higher headquarters, which during
expected periods of combat would require “Weapons Free” (authorization to fire). Upon launch
of a threat missile, overhead sensors would detect and report the launch directly to the KEI fire
unit. The KEI command and control system would evaluate the threat, classify it, and launch a
KEI interceptor at a predicted intercept point in space. Continuous updates would be provided to
the interceptor based on overhead sensor data.
Airborne Laser
The ABL program was planned to provide a boost-phase defense capability against a
range of missile threats. This is no longer a program of record for the MDA but has been
downgraded to a research program called the Airborne Laser Test Bed (ALTB), an advanced
program for the directed-energy research program. For the purposes of this report, ABL is
referred to as if it could provide an operational defense capability; where appropriate, the
differences between the original ABL and the present ALTB are noted.
The attractiveness of using directed-energy weapons, notably lasers, for boost-phase
defense arises out of their potential to deliver a lethal dose of damage to a target at the velocity
of light from long distances. The fundamental properties on which the choice of the laser
depends include the wavelength, power output, efficiency of conversion of the primary energy
into laser energy, and, of course, size and weight.
So, in principle, the laser is ideal for boost-phase intercept since it is are able to project a
large amount of power at the speed of light over several hundred kilometers onto a modest-sized
(~1 m) spot. To capitalize on these benefits, MDA established the ABL program, which was
proposed to consist of a large airframe (a modified Boeing 747-400F airplane) carrying a
multimegawatt laser, known as the high-energy laser (HEL). The HEL beam is directed onto the
boosting missile body for several seconds. During that time sufficient energy per unit area
(fluence) is delivered to cause enough heating to result in mechanical failure of the missile body
itself, thus disabling it and preventing the payload from reaching its target. The advantage of this
system is that it delivers a lethal fluence to the threat missile in a matter of seconds from a great
distance. Because the laser beam travels at the speed of light, the distance from which the threat
can be intercepted is not limited by the flight time of a rocket interceptor. Rather, the range is
limited by the fluence required, the laser power, and the ability to focus the beam onto the target
at low elevation angles through the atmosphere. The ability to focus depends on the laser beam
2-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
quality and issues of light propagation in the atmosphere itself. The beam propagation
limitations are complex and are provided in the classified annex (Appendix J).4
Figure 2-2 displays key parts of the ABL system aboard the Boeing 747-400F. HELs are
located in the body of the airframe, and the beam exits the plane at the nose, directed by a large
(1.5-m-diameter) movable mirror in a turret.5 The beam may be directed anywhere within a
sphere with a cone cut out in the backward and forward directions with respect to the line of
flight. The mirror rotates within the turret so that beam may be directed by up to about 120 deg
from the line of flight.6 The turret rotates so that any angle around the line of flight may be
chosen.
The ABL must be on station near the location from which the threat missiles would be
launched. One or more ABLs would orbit in figure 8-like patterns in that vicinity. Such patterns
allow an advantageous side-on view of the potential threat all of the time except when the
airframe must turn at the end of the 8; however, a side-on or head-on attitude is always
maintained by choosing the correct direction of circulation in the 8. The ABL would fly at an
altitude of approximately 12 km in order to minimize the amount of atmosphere through which
the beam must travel. For redundancy and for dealing with multiple launches, two ABLs would
cover one threat area. Such redundancy would be necessary during refueling operations to avoid
gaps in coverage.
The ABL would operate autonomously to identify threats by means of onboard IR
sensors that detect the exhaust plume of the boosting missile. With knowledge of the location of
the threat, the tracking illuminator laser (TILL) is activated to acquire the target, determine the
exact aim point desired using the image of the nose, and provide illumination for first-order
adaptive optics (AO) corrections. (Astronomers have used AO to at least partially cancel out
atmospheric disturbances.) The beacon illuminator laser (BILL) places its beam on the missile
body, and that image provides the higher order correction information. Finally, the chemical
FIGURE 2-2 Cutaway of the ABL system showing its key parts. SOURCE: Col Laurence Dobrot, USAF, Missile
Defense Agency, “Airborne-Laser System Program Office: Presentation to the National Academy of Sciences,”
presentation to the committee, January 14, 2010.
4David K. Barton, Roger Falcone, Daniel Kleppner, Frederick K. Lamb, Ming K. Lau, Harvey L. Lynch, David
Moncton, et al. 2004. Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for
National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues, American Physical Society, College Park, Md., October
5.
5Ibid, p. S299.
6Ibid, p. S339.
2-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
oxygen-iodine laser (COIL) is activated with the HEL focused on the target for long enough to
deliver the fluence required to induce mechanical failure of the missile. Mechanical failure
results from heating a metal sufficiently to weaken it. It is not necessary to melt the metal to
weaken it considerably. The failure itself may come from rupture due to pressure inside the
container or from a loss of strength to resist the axial forces of acceleration of the boosting
missile. There will probably be a clear optical signature of the mechanical failure to confirm the
intercept. The signature may be an explosion or very erratic flight of the booster.
It is unlikely that the defense will know when a threat missile is likely to be launched.
Therefore, the ABLs must be able to remain on station for extended periods. Providing
continuous coverage will require in-flight refueling and a handoff to other airframes to relieve
the crew or provide other maintenance for the airframe or its systems.
Other
Space-Based Interceptors
One problem of surface-based (i. e., on land, at sea, or in the air) KKVs is their access to
the threat missile. There is a limit on how far a KKV can be based from the intercept point (not
the launch point); this limit depends on the fly-out time of the interceptor and the burn time of
the threat. A country that is large enough can deliver an array of missile threats that are not
vulnerable to surface-based intercept in their boost phase. There may be political constraints on
basing interceptors outside enemy territory, in neighboring countries. One way to avoid the
geographic constraints suffered by surface-based interceptors is to base them in space, on
platforms that carry one or several such interceptors. The enemy may thereby be denied all
locations within the latitudes of the orbits. This is the attractive feature of space-based
interceptors (SBIs).
At this time there is no program of record within MDA for SBIs. This report noted large
differences in the size estimates of Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory’s (LLNL’s) KV
and that of the more conservative estimate found in the 2004 American Physical Society (APS)
report previously noted. The committee’s assessment of these differences and their validity are
discussed in the classified annex (Appendix J). In short, the committee believes the LLNL KV
was much lighter because it had much less divert velocity propulsion, apparently because it
separated from the booster first stage much later than did the APS KV design. The committee
believes the sizing methodology used in the APS report is more realistic.7 In addition, MDA
canceled the Space Test Bed program in its 2010 budget. Moreover,
in previous budgets, MDA had established the Space Test Bed to explore concepts for and to
conduct research to support potential deployment of boost-phase intercept defenses in space. In the
2009 budget, MDA had planned to spend about $300 million for that research, and the
Congressional Budget Office’s (CBO’s) projection of DOD’s plans, based on the 2009 future years
defense plan (FYDP), incorporated the assumption that an operational space based interceptor
system would be developed and fielded.8
The SBI platforms would be placed in multiple rings of satellites, with multiple satellites
per ring.9 The orbits are inclined with respect to Earth’s equator, and the maximum latitude that
the SBIs can cover is a little larger than the inclination angle. Such a constellation of satellites
7Op cit.
8Congressional Budget Office. 2004. Alternatives for Boost-Phase Missile Defense, Washington, D. C., July.
9The critical number for coverage is the average number of satellites within range, and that is well characterized
by the product of the number of rings times the number of satellites per ring. The trade-off between the number of
rings and the number of satellites per ring for a fixed product is slowly varying. In addition, the satellites were
assumed to have a service life of about 7 years and the disposal of expired platforms is not taken into account.
2-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
results in nonuniform coverage of the ground, where “coverage” means the number of satellites
that are within range to deliver an SBI to a threat missile within the time window. Generally
speaking, one wants to have at least one SBI within range, but it may be desirable to have more
than one for redundancy or to deal with raids. There is substantially better coverage (i. e., more
satellites within range) for latitudes near the orbit inclination angle and poorer coverage at low
latitudes. However, coverage at latitudes above the orbit inclination rapidly drops to zero above
the latitude of the inclination of the orbit.
Airborne-Based Interceptors
Recently, ABIs, also known as airborne hit to kills (AHTKs), have been reconsidered and
show some potential applications in certain conflict scenarios. The primary difficulty with ABIs,
like all other proposed kinetic boost-phase systems, is the need to be close enough (within about
50 km) to the target so that an interceptor with a given speed and a KKV of sufficient agility can
reach and successfully home in on the accelerating booster before the boost phase ends. ABI
programs have existed in the past, but today only a few low-end ABI systems based on existing
interceptors remain on the drawing boards—for example, the network-centric airborne defense
element (NCADE), based on a modified advanced medium-range air-to-air missile (AMRAAM)
missile, and the air-launched hit-to-kill (ALHK) program, based on an air-launched version of
the PAC-3 missile. These systems might be able to intercept boosting targets at very short range,
but they rely primarily on aerodynamic forces for divert and, consequently, cannot intercept
accelerating targets above approximately 30 km in altitude, where most of the boost phase
occurs, especially for missiles with ranges beyond 1,000 km. Hence, they cannot provide a
robust boost-phase intercept capability.
ANALYSIS
Overview
A boost-phase defense system is one that presumably avoids the midcourse
countermeasure problem, provided the system can intercept the hostile missile’s burning booster
rocket with its bright exhaust plume before the hostile missile reaches its desired velocity and
deploys its payload. If such a boost-phase defense system can achieve that end within the
extremely short engagement window available, it can protect a large area against launches from a
specific locale. In principle, boost-phase intercept is technically feasible and appears attractive.
To take an extreme example, a soldier with a 50-caliber machine gun or handheld rocket
launcher 300 yards from a missile launch pad could easily destroy that missile as soon as it lifts
off its launch pad. This is so for three reasons: (1) the soldier can see the hostile missile as soon
as it emerges from its launcher; (2) the speed and acceleration of the hostile missile at that time
are very low compared to the fly-out velocity of the soldier’s firepower; and (3) the hostile
missile’s motion at that time is tracked by the soldier’s eyes and is predictable. For the same
reasons, an Aegis SM-2 Block IV antiair missile can shoot down a short-range ship-launched
Scud-type theater missile during boost if the Aegis ship is downrange within 50 km of the
launch.
Unfortunately, trying to intercept a hostile booster rocket (solid or liquid propellant) from
a significant distance dramatically turns the tables. For one thing, there is not much time
between knowledge of where the hostile missile is directed and the time available for the
interceptor to reach out to hit the target at a militarily useful range. This is compounded by the
fact that the hostile missile is traveling at about the same velocity as the interceptor and its
acceleration is less predictable. Even so, it is possible to guide a suitably maneuverable
2-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
interceptor in order to hit a hostile thrusting booster, assuming the interceptor can get there in
time.
As noted in Chapter 1, the committee had access to classified information provided by
the Missile Defense Agency on its programs of record; however, the committee chose to develop
a set of notional threat missiles, notional interceptor designs and notional sensors to explore the
basic physical limitations of missile defense system performance, with the understanding that a
public report was not only requested by Congress but also helps improve public understanding of
ballistic missile defense issues. The following analysis is based, in large part, on notional data
developed by the committee and is stated as such throughout this chapter. While boost-phase
defense has been advocated as the most efficient way to deal with fractionated payloads and
exoatmospheric (midcourse) penetration aids, such systems are extremely vulnerable depending
on threat booster characteristics and operational considerations. The committee’s analysis of
boost-phase defense concludes that it could be technically possible in some instances but
operationally and economically impractical for almost all missions.
Time, Range, and Technical Constraints: Iran and North Korea as Examples
As previously noted, the committee’s analysis focused on assessing U. S. boost-phase
defense systems against ballistic missile threats from Iran and North Korea. Figure 2-3
illustrates the dilemma for all boost-phase defense systems (i. e., the pressing intercept timelines
for both solid and liquid threat booster rockets) and specifically displays this dilemma for what
most boost-phase defense advocates would call the less onerous of the two ballistic missile
defense problems—that is, defense against ICBMs launched from North Korea). Moreover,
advocates for boost-phase defense would argue that because of the North Korea’s relatively
small size and proximity to a coastal boundary, Aegis ships along with military aircraft could get
fairly close to the threat boost trajectories in order to minimize the reach required. In Figure 2-3,
it is assumed that the threat was detected at an altitude above the cloud cover, which we would
assume to be 30 sec after launch of a notional solid-propellant missile and 45 sec after launch of
a notional liquid-propellant missile.
In understanding the challenges of boost-phase defense of the U. S. homeland and
Canada, it is helpful to begin by looking at the ground tracks of trajectories on the rotating Earth
from launch to impact and where an ICBM payload lands as a function of where its boost is
terminated. Figure 2-4 shows the ground tracks of ICBMs launched from Iran and North Korea
to reach the United States.10
While it is convenient to describe missile performance in a standard way, that is, on a
nonrotating Earth basis—it is important, particularly for longer range threats, to consider rotating
Earth effects. This is important both for assessing what territory is at risk for a given threat
missile performance and for looking at the ability to engage such threats during their boost or
early midcourse phase of flight. While there are additional second-order Earth effects—such as
Earth’s oblateness (nonspherical shape) and local gravity variations—which must be considered
in accurate targeting, these are not of importance for this discussion.
10Figures 2-4 to 2-8 and Figures 2-11 to 2-16 were generated from the committee’s analysis using Google Earth.
©2011 Google, Map Data©2011 Tele Atlas.
2-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-3 Timelines for ICBM boost-phase intercepts of ICBMs launched from North Korea (upper) and Iran
(lower). Based on data from David K. Barton, Roger Falcone, Daniel Kleppner, Frederick K. Lamb, Ming K. Lau,
Harvey L. Lynch, David Moncton, et al. 2004. Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-
Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues, American Physical Society,
College Park, Md., October 5, pp. S23 and S80.
FIGURE 2-4 Notional trajectories for ICBMs launched from Iran and North Korea toward North America.
2-9
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
When a ballistic missile flies due north, the effect of Earth’s rotation on range is small (2-
3 percent), affected by the launch azimuth required to account for the initial missile velocity
owing to Earth’s tangential velocity at the launch point and also to lead the target, which moves
during the flight time of the missile. When a missile is launched in an easterly direction, Earth’s
rotation increases the maximum range of the missile relative to its nonrotating Earth descriptor.
Conversely, when launched in a westerly direction, Earth’s rotation reduces the reach of
that same missile. Intuitively the opposite should be true since the target movement from west to
east during the roughly 30-40 min flight time of the missile (~7.5 degrees of longitude, or ~800
km at the equator) would be the dominant effect. However, keeping in mind that an ICBM has a
burnout velocity of 6.5-7.4 km/sec or so, Earth’s tangential velocity at the launch point (almost
0.5 km/sec for a launch point at the equator) has a much greater effect on the effective range of
the missile than the distance the target moves during the flight time.
For example, if a missile with a nonrotating Earth range of 12,000 km is launched from
the center of Iran and flies almost due north, the actual ground range, including Earth rotation
effects, is close to the range for a nonrotating Earth. Thus that missile is able to strike Seattle,
approximately 12,000 km away. On the other hand, that same missile launched against the East
Coast has a launch azimuth of about 315 degrees (45 degrees west of north), and that same
missile can only reach a great circle range of about 10,000 km. To reach all of Florida or Texas
at a great circle range of 12,000 km, a nonrotating range capability in excess of 14,000 km would
be required.
These differences are important for three reasons. First, when the threat posed to the
United States is assessed, the actual ground range reach is an indicator of an adversary’s goals.
Second, since the longest ground range needed determines the minimum energy trajectory for a
given missile, a longer range with its lower flight path angle and altitude at boost termination as
well as in midcourse flight, this range also determines the reach required for early intercept of an
ICBM aimed at the United States or an IRBM aimed at northern Europe from a site in the Middle
East (see Figure 2-4).
Third, Earth’s rotation between the time of launch of the threat from any given point until
the launch of an interceptor sited to counter that threat affects the trajectory of the interceptor
needed for earliest and latest engagement of that threat as well as the footprint that can be
defended. For the purposes of this study, the maximum range of a missile is the distance to
which it can fly a given payload mass and constraints on its boost trajectory such as (1) the
maximum dynamic pressure, which typically establishes the heating and thermal protection for
structure and controllability requirements due to wind shears, and (2) the dynamic pressure at
first-stage separation, which determines control requirements to recover from deviations in angle
of attack due to first-stage-thrust tail-off.
Figure 2-5 shows contours of thrust cutoff time (with a total burn time of 250 sec) for a
representative two-stage liquid ICBM with a maximum nonrotating Earth range of 12,000 km
that is launched from the safest location in North Korea. Figure 2-6 then shows similar contours
for a representative solid propellant ICBM of the same maximum range with a maximum burn
time of 180 sec. Moreover, the analysis shows that a boost-phase defense system emplaced for
protecting the western third of the United States and mainland Alaska would need to intercept a
North Korean-launched ICBM that uses liquid propellant at about 230 sec (or 20 sec before
burnout) and one that uses solid propellant at 150 sec (or 30 sec before burnout).
2-10
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-5 Thrust cutoff time contours for a notional two-stage liquid ICBM with an assumed total burn time of
250 sec and a maximum nonrotating Earth range of 12,000launched from North Korea.
FIGURE 2-6 Thrust cutoff time contours for a notional three-stage solid ICBM with an assumed burn time of 180
sec and a maximum nonrotating Earth range of 12,000 km launched from North Korea.
A similar analysis is provided for Iran. Specifically, Figures 2-7 and 2-8 show similar
contours for ICBMs launched from central Iran; however, the ICBM range must be more than
13,300 km because the missiles, particularly those targeting the East Coast of the United States,
would be launched in a northwesterly direction and their reach would be reduced by the effects
of Earth rotation. In summary, the analysis shows that a boost-phase defense system emplaced
for protecting Alaska is the most stressing case and would need to intercept an Iranian-launched
ICBM using liquid propellant at about 242 sec (or 8 sec before burnout) and one using solid
propellant at 169 sec (or 11 sec before burnout) for the notional ICBM designed used in this
study.
2-11
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-7 Thrust cutoff time contours for a notional two-stage liquid ICBM with a maximum nonrotating Earth
range of 13,300 km that is launched from central Iran.
FIGURE 2-8 Thrust cutoff time contours for a notional three-stage solid ICBM with an assumed burn time of 180
sec and a maximum nonrotating Earth range of 13,300 km launched from central Iran.
Up to this point, the analysis has shown the pressing time constraints for achieving boost-
phase intercept against a notional ICBM—solid or liquid propellant—launched from Iran or
North Korea toward the United States (including Alaska) and Canada. Now, the reach of any
given interceptor is calculated. To assess terrestrial-based kinetic boost-phase defense, the
committee chose two sizes of interceptor. The first was a notional 6 km/sec fly-out velocity, 70-
sec burn interceptor without a third stage.
2-12
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The second was a notional 4.5 km/sec fly-out velocity interceptor that could be carried in
the vertical launch system (VLS) Aegis system. It also could be carried and launched by a
tactical aircraft. These two interceptors, carrying a KV with the necessary agility for the boost-
phase missions, were used to understand engagement performance for both Iran and North
Korea.
Figure 2-9 shows how the reach of the interceptor is calculated.11 Here, head-on
(coplaner) engagements define the maximum reach that an interceptor of a given fly-out velocity
launched at the earliest opportunity would have to kinetically engage the hostile missile at the
desired time. This maximum reach, R, applies to any interceptor launched within a circle with
radius R, derived from a projection of the desired intercept point on the ground track. Figure 2-
10 shows an example of a coplanar, or head-on, engagement for the notional 6 km/sec
interceptor against a North Korean liquid ICBM that was modeled and then used like the
preceding construction example to determine the general case of engagement at any aspect
angle.12 The interceptor fly-out contour times are referenced to the detection at an altitude of 7.5
km plus 15 sec in accordance with the timeline in Figure 2-3 to allow the missile to develop
enough horizontal velocity so the sensor can select a rough point at which to commit an
interceptor without a high risk of wasting it by exceeding its divert capability during boost. The
range from interceptor launch point is shown to be about 515 km for intercept at a time after
launch from North Korea, consistent with avoiding impacts on North America.
Using planar engagement simulations like the one shown in Figure 2-9, it is possible to
calculate the greatest distance (or reach, R) to the earliest point at which a kinetic interceptor
with a given fly-out velocity could engage a hostile missile. A view over the North Korean
launch point in Figure 2-11 shows the azimuth and boost ground tracks to various parts of the
United States (noted at the top of the figure) for notional liquid- and solid-propellant ICBM
threats from North Korea. One can see where intercepts must occur geographically in order to
defend North America against such threats.
FIGURE 2-9 The boost-phase engagement—calculating reach of the interceptor. SOURCE: Based on data from
David K. Barton, Roger Falcone, Daniel Kleppner, Frederick K. Lamb, Ming K. Lau, Harvey L. Lynch, David
Moncton, et al., 2004, Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for
National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues, American Physical Society, College Park, Md., October
5.
11See David K. Barton, Roger Falcone, Daniel Kleppner, Frederick K. Lamb, Ming K. Lau, Harvey L. Lynch,
David Moncton, et al, 2004, Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept
Systems for National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues, American Physical Society, College Park,
Md., October 5.
12The boost-phase intercept problem is dominated by the challenge of the short burntime of solid fuel rockets.
However, North Korea currently uses slower burning liquid fuels. Since the North Korean threat has been the focus
of much U. S. homeland defense work, this constrained threat is worth analysis. It must, however, be kept in mind
that North Korea could shift to solid fuel, possibly with external assistance, in an effort to frustrate U. S. defenses.
2-13
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-10 Fly-out fan for a notional 6 km/sec interceptor engaging a liquid-propellant ICBM head-on to
determine R.
FIGURE 2-11 Illustrative boost-phase ground tracks for notional ICBMs to various parts of the United States from
North Korea: (a) notional liquid ICBM and (b) notional solid ICBM.
The red region is the ground range where threat boost termination would result in impacts
in the United States and Canada. It applies to all boost-phase intercepts regardless of basing.
The northern edge of the red zone is where the burnout for maximum range occurs. The
southern edge is the cutoff times derived from the impact contour charts. Ground range from the
launch site is shown for reference. The solid threat burns out at 519 km from its launch point,
2-14
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
and the liquid threat burns out about 575 km from the launch point. The launch point was
chosen to maximize the difficulty of both intercepts and attacks on the launch site for their
adversaries. The more easterly fly-outs show the need for earliest intercept of ICBM threats to
Alaska. Also shown for reference are ground tracks and ranges to Hawaii, Tokyo, and Guam.
Land-, Sea-, or Air-Based Kinetic Boost-Phase Defense
The committee first examines the requirements and limits for terrestrial-based boost-
phase interceptors. In all cases, these interceptors are constrained by geography and sovereignty
to basing that is militarily and politically viable. Figure 2-12 shows where these same boost-
phase defense systems would need to be emplaced in order to kinetically engage liquid-
propellant ICBMs aimed at America; Figure 2-13 shows this information for solid-propellant
ICBMs.
FIGURE 2-12 Notional interceptor ranges to kinetically engage a liquid-propellant ICBM launched from North
Korea. Yellow and black arrows represent fly-out velocities of notional 6 km/sec and 4.5 km/sec interceptors,
respectively.
2-15
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-13 Notional interceptor ranges to kinetically engage a solid-propellant ICBM launched from North
Korea. Yellow and black arrows represent fly-out velocities of notional 6 km/sec and 4.5 km/sec interceptors,
respectively.
In both Figures 2-12 and 2-13, the launch point for the notional ICBMs launched from
North Korea was chosen to make intercepts and attacks on the launch site the most difficult—
that is to say, the safest locations, as shown in Figures 2-11. Figure 2-12 shows the radius of the
arcs within which notional interceptors with fly-out velocities of 4.5 km/sec (shown as black
arrows) and 6 km/sec (shown as yellow arrows) must be based in order to intercept before the
red zone is reached. It can be seen that even with no decision time, (1) no 4.5 km/sec terrestrial
interceptor can engage in boost-phase intercept even against slow-burning liquid ICBMs unless it
is launched from China or North Korea itself and (2) the 6 km/sec interceptor, if based on a ship,
can engage the more easterly liquid ICBM trajectories, but to engage the more western
trajectories headed to eastern North America it would have to be so close to the North Korean
coast as to be highly vulnerable to attack.
Engaging notional solid-propellant threats from North Korea is even more constrained, as
shown in Figure 2-13. Reaching even the more easterly notional threat trajectories requires a 6
km/sec interceptor to be based unacceptably close to the adversary’s territory. Note that the
reach of the 4.5 km/sec interceptor is greater against notional solid ICBMs than against liquid
ICBMs even though solid burn times are much shorter. This is because the notional liquid boost
trajectories are of lower altitude and the 4.5 km/sec interceptor cannot get low enough at longer
range to engage the notional liquid-propellant threat at a greater distance.
Because of their shorter burn times and lower burnout altitudes, it is not feasible to
intercept notional short- and medium-range missiles with ground- or sea-based versions of the
two interceptors or space-based interceptors in the exoatmosphere. Intercepting notional missiles
of 2,000 km range or less during boost would require interceptors that can engage within the
2-16
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
atmosphere, and those interceptors would have to be close to the threat launch point. One such
example is a notional 1,300 km single-stage missile aimed at Tokyo. Here, boost-phase intercept
of such an attack is infeasible with a platform outside North Korea’s airspace.
The committee found only one case of a notional ICBM launched from North Korea
against Hawaii that could be engaged during boost phase by a notional 4.5 km/sec interceptor,
provided it has a more agile KV than currently planned.
In summary, Figure 2-12 shows that a notional North Korean-launched liquid-propellant
ICBM aimed at the east coast would be the most pressing challenge for a boost-phase defense
system to kinetically engage. Moreover, a ground-based boost-phase interceptor with a nominal
speed of 6 km/sec would have to be based at sea or in China to reach the boost phase of a
notional North Korean liquid-propellant ICBM. However, a notional 6 km/sec interceptor
appears to be too large to be carried in the Aegis vertical launch system (VLS) or on a tactical
aircraft. From Figure 2-13 it is evident that a notional 4.5 km/sec interceptor has no viable
boost-phase capability against a notional solid ICBM unless it overflies North Korean airspace
and that even a notional 6.0 km/sec interceptor, when sea based, has little room to maneuver, and
then for only a limited azimuth of threat launches.
One can conclude then that, until otherwise demonstrated, no airborne or Aegis VLS-
based interceptor could be used for boost-phase defense against notional ICBMs aimed at the
United States, even against a country that is as small as North Korea and that is accessible by
sea, unless those interceptors are based on or over neighboring territory or over the threat country
itself. However, a possible application limited by the interceptor fly-out envelope and on-station
endurance is the engagement of notional longer range missiles launched from North Korea
against Hawaii or other Pacific Ocean targets where the boost trajectories are headed toward
international waters or allied territories and where boost-phase interceptors can be stationed.
A similar analysis is provided for notional ICBMs launched from Iran and aimed at North
America. Figure 2-14 shows the fly-out ground tracks and azimuths for notional liquid- and
solid-propellant ICBMs launched toward North America from central Iran. The launch location
is assumed to be central Iran. As with North Korea the red zone is the zone in which a velocity
has been reached that would allow impacting the area being defended. Threats must be engaged
in their boost phase before reaching that zone regardless of where the interceptor is based. Also
shown are ranges and azimuths to Israel and Gibraltar.
Figures 2-15 and 2-16 illustrate the problem of engaging notional long-range ballistic
missiles launched from Iran (Figure 2-15 is for liquid-propellant ICBMs whereas Figure 2-16 is
for solid-propellant ICBMs). Again, the black arcs represent the reach for a notional 4.5 km/sec
interceptor against a notional liquid ICBM. No matter whether the ICBM is headed to North
America, as shown, or to Europe, a 4.5 km/sec interceptor would have to be based in the Caspian
Sea or in neighboring territory in Turkmenistant to be able to catch liquid ICBMs in their boost
phase. Even a notional 6 km/sec interceptor would have to be in the Caspian Sea or in
neighboring territory in Azerbaijan or Turkmenistan. No effective boost-phase defense of
Europe or the Middle East is possible because of the shorter burn times associated with medium
and intermediate-range ballistic missiles and the fact that Iran could arrange to launch the attack
from locations such that no boost-phase interceptor could be in range from outside Iranian
airspace. There has been some discussion of the use of stealthy aircraft or UAVs carrying
interceptors loitering in the southern Caspian; however, because of the limited reach of airborne
boost phase interceptors and the fact that even stealthy airborne platforms could potentially be
vulnerable to air defenses, such concepts seem impractical at the current time.
2-17
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-14 Fly-out ground tracks and azimuths for notional liquid and solid ICBMs launched toward North
America from central Iran.
FIGURE 2-15 Notional boost-phase engagement of liquid ICBMs launched from Iran.
2-18
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-16 Notional boost-phase engagement of solid ICBMs launched from Iran.
For notional solid ICBMs launched from Iran the possible basing area shrinks even more
for the notional 6 km/sec interceptor, but the reach of the notional 4.5 km/sec interceptors
actually increases somewhat. While this is counterintuitive, it is so because in this case, the
trajectory of a liquid ICBM in its boost phase is significantly lower than that of a solid ICBM
such that the interceptor cannot launch until it can engage at an altitude it can enforce.
Accordingly, with one or two exceptions, terrestrial-based boost-phase defense systems do not
appear attractive given the timeline and geopolitical constraints.
Directed-Energy Boost-Phase Defense
The range and time constraints on boost-phase defense using kinetic intercept is one
reason for the interest in the use of directed-energy weapons for boost-phase defense.13 The
ABL was designed to exploit the delivery of energy at the speed of light to perform the boost-
phase intercept mission. Space-based lasers have also been pursued. Virtually no fly-out time is
involved, although dwell time on target is involved, and the beam agility is a function only of
how fast the pointing optics can be repositioned. While laser weapons sound like the obvious
answer, the irradiance (power per unit area) that a laser can deliver on a distant target is
ultimately limited by the power of the laser and the diameter of the exit optics of the device. In
reality, atmospheric effects will substantially disturb the propagation of the beam to a degree that
increases rapidly with the distance traveled through the atmosphere. Much has been
accomplished, however, in developing pointing and tracking capabilities and AO to maintain
beam quality.
While laser energy is transmitted at the speed of light, the damage mechanism for
continuous wave lasers is the heating of materials to failure, which requires a certain dwell time.
13Additional information and analysis can be found in the classified annex (Appendix J).
2-19
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The amount of energy delivered per unit time is determined by the energy density of the prime
energy source and by the limits on the size and weight of the hardware to convert that primary
energy into a beam and project it. These limit the practical power, aperture, and endurance of
lasers that can be carried on real platforms.
In the end, even though laser propagation is nearly instantaneous, the dwell time to heat
the target is substantial and, depending on the target material and coupling efficiency, takes
several seconds, even in the absence of countermeasures to harden the booster against laser
attack. With countermeasures, the challenge is greater. Raid missile launches stress the ABL.
In the CONOPS there would be at best two ABLs flying in a single combat air patrol (CAP)
within range of the missiles, and each ABL can engage only one threat at a time. There is a
limited window of opportunity to effect intercepts in which the missile is high enough to have a
thin enough air column in the laser’s path for long-range propagation and before the threat burns
out. In short, the ABL has a limited number of shots without refueling the laser. The slewing
from one target to another can be done in a relatively short time.
There are other limits to the useful range of high-energy lasers for boost-phase
engagements. Even at the speed of light and the relatively thin atmosphere at the operating
altitude of the ABL, atmospheric effects degrade the coherence of the beam unless variations in
the structure of the atmospheric path from the laser to the target are compensated for in real time.
This requires leading the target, and, even at the speed of light, the round trip of the calibration
beam limits the effective range.
When a laser such as the ABL (now renamed the airborne laser test bed (ALTB)) is based
on an aircraft, it is propagated through the atmosphere over a substantial distance, albeit at lower
densities than propagation on the ground. Thus the properties of the atmosphere vis-à-vis the
laser wavelength are very important. These properties include the absorption, scattering, and
turbulence. Those wavelengths that are strongly absorbed by the constituents of the atmosphere
are inappropriate for long-distance propagation. Notably, these are the wavelengths absorbed by
atmospheric water vapor, carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, oxides of nitrogen, and so forth, and
they are ruled out. Fortunately, there are several windows in the atmospheric transmission where
absorption is small enough to allow radiation to be propagated over hundreds of kilometers. The
early lasers, starting with the carbon dioxide, hydrogen fluoride/deuterium fluoride (HF/DF), and
COIL lasers, were chosen because their wavelengths were in such low-loss atmospheric
windows.14
While the exact design power cannot be provided in this unclassified report, MDA
describes the ABL as a multimegawatt laser and the ALTB as a megawatt-class laser. By the
early part of 2010, the ALTB HEL had achieved about 80 percent of the Tail 1 design power.
This performance can be improved, but substantial effort would be required.15 This does not
appear to be a high priority at this time for MDA, and correctly so.
Inhomogeneities in the density of the atmosphere, called “turbulence” for short, result in
inhomogeneities in the index of refraction. In turn, these variations perturb the propagation of a
laser beam. A beam that would have been focused in a uniform atmosphere will no longer be
focused. This is a problem well known to astronomers who use ground-based telescopes. The
best solution for astronomers is to avoid the atmosphere and have the telescope in space—as, for
instance, the Hubble Space Telescope—eliminating the problem. In the same way a laser
weapon would be space based. For operation in the atmosphere, one would try to minimize the
distance the beam travels through the atmosphere. Thus, a high flying aircraft is a much better
14Additional information on the ABL/ALTB, including wavelength selection, is provided in the classified annex
(see Appendix I).
15Missile Defense Agency. 2010. “ALTB Questions in Preparation for March 16-18 Presentations to the National
Academy of Sciences,” March 17.
2-20
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
platform than a device on the ground. There is a practical limitation on the altitude at which a
very massive laser may be flown and kept aloft for many hours at a time. This limit is about 12
km for the 747-400F airframe and the load that it must carry.
Minimizing the atmosphere is not sufficient, however, and other measures are required.
Astronomers have used AO to at least partially cancel out atmospheric disturbances, achieving
great improvements in imaging. These phase distortions can be applied using a deformable
mirror, but there are limitations on how well this works.
It is convenient to distinguish between two classes of AO errors and corrections: (1) first
order and (2) higher order. These describe the variation of the phase error across the aperture.
First-order (i. e., linear) errors cause an apparent movement of the whole image with time as the
atmosphere changes, because the phase error is linear across the aperture. This is a prism
distortion. Left uncorrected, the object is not positioned where it appears to be. Because of the
time variation, this blurs the image over the time of exposure. Usually, the first-order error is the
most serious. It can be compensated for by a simple, flat mirror that tips or tilts, keeping the
image in the same place. Second-order (quadratic) and higher errors are defocus and two types
of astigmatism. They are corrected using a deformable mirror whose local shape can be varied
in compensation. These corrections are also time dependent. The higher order corrections are
much more complex, but also important.
The ABL makes its AO corrections using two different systems. To make a first-order
correction, the nose of the target missile is illuminated with a TILL and the edges of the nose
image are used to define the position of the target. The TILL is a kilowatt-class solid-state laser
that instead of being focused on the target, illuminates it with a meters-wide beam to see the
geometrical edges. In turn, the first-order phase distortion derived from the nose image is
applied to a planar mirror for the HEL beam to correct this error. To deal with higher order
errors, a second kilowatt-class laser (BILL) provides a beacon on the body of the target. The
wavefront of this image is processed, and the phase corrections are applied to a deformable
mirror to correct the HEL beam.
For various reasons, one of which was the ABM Treaty, the ABL was designed for use
against short-range theater missiles, not long-range missiles like ICBMs. Because the long-range
missiles burn longer and burn out at higher altitudes, more of the optical path goes through less
of the turbulent atmosphere. Consequently, the AO problem is much easier to solve. In turn,
this means that the effective range of the ABL can be greater for long-range missiles than for
short-range missiles.
In principle an advantage of the ABL is that aircraft could be deployed to respond to an
evolving threat. This could be simpler than deploying an entire ground-based interceptor base.
However, the redeployment of an ABL CAP would require enough aircraft to maintain an
aircraft on station at the previous threat area(s). In addition, ABLs require substantial
infrastructure on the ground for supply and maintenance. Thus, such a redeployment is by no
means trivial.
The original plan for the ABL program called for two developmental aircraft, one of
which, known as Tail 1, exists. A second development aircraft, designated Tail 2, was planned.
Both Tail 1 and Tail 2 were intended as research tools, not as operational weapons. It was
anticipated that once the development was complete, a fleet of seven operational aircraft would
be acquired for a single CAP. This would allow the ABL to be used for boost-phase defense at
one site.
The Air Combat Command (ACC) CONOPS document for the defense against one threat
location (within the coverage of a figure-eight flight pattern) would require seven aircraft.16 Of
16DOD Office of Testing and Evaluation. 2010. “Airborne Laser (ABL) Assessment of Operational
Effectiveness, Suitability, and Survivability,” January.
2-21
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
the seven, five would be needed to keep two aircraft on station 24/7, and two would be in
maintenance. If the maintenance has not included any laser or chemical operations, the aircraft
can be rapidly turned around for another sortie until ~23 hr of engine run time accumulates, at
which point engine oil servicing is required. If there have been laser or chemical operations, 24
hr are required between sorties.17 A standard crew shift would normally be limited to 12 hr to
avoid fatigue. A single fuel load can keep the aircraft aloft for 7 hr at about 12 km. Without
refueling, 1 hr of that time would be for transit from base to station, 5 hr on station, and 1 hr to
return to base. With refueling, there would be one refueling during a single crew shift. A report
from ODT&E notes that refueling time is about 1 hr, so the total time on station would be 12 – 1
– 1 – 1, or 9 hr for a 12-hr mission.18 From this, it is easy to see that at least five flight-ready
aircraft would be needed to keep two on orbit with redundancy to cover some gaps.
Clearly it would be very important to establish air supremacy over the enemy territory
where the ABLs would fly. The ABLs are very high-value assets, and they would be high-
priority targets for an enemy attack. MDA has suggested that the ABLs could fly with escort
aircraft to deal with conventional aircraft.19 The committee does not concur with this suggestion.
The long-term escort of unarmed assets is not supported by Air Force policy. MDA has also
suggested that the ABLs have some self-defense capability, but the committee has not been told
how that function would fit into the CONOPS. There is an obvious vulnerability, because the
laser weapons cannot defend the rear of the aircraft.
A different and more challenging threat to the ABLs would be long-range SAMs. Simply
staying out of range of SAMs may prevent an ABL from attacking an enemy’s missile. The use
of onboard self-defense systems similar to those on other operational aircraft has been suggested,
but the committee has no information on the efficacy of such measures for this application.20
The ABL’s weapons are not well suited for attacking an incoming SAM, and they would offer no
defense at all for an attack beyond the field of regard of the turret for the rear 120 degrees of
azimuth. Ideally, establishing air supremacy would include taking out all the air defenses like
SAMs.
Establishing air supremacy before the outbreak of hostilities would be very provocative
and could itself lead directly to hostilities. Thus, it is more likely that the ABL would be used
only after hostilities had begun, and that it would therefore be of limited value in stopping the
first attack from an enemy.
Space-Based Boost-Phase Defense21
Space-based boost-phase defense can avoid the geographic limitations of terrestrial
systems and can in principle engage even ICBMs from a large country. However, it would
require hundreds and perhaps several thousand interceptors stored in orbit and would be more
than 10 times as expensive than any other defense alternative.
Because geography is a fundamental constraint on terrestrial-based boost-phase defenses,
advocates for space-based boost-phase intercept argue that putting the interceptors on orbiting
satellites eliminates that constraint. On the other hand, a spaced-based system would face two
other daunting constraints. Like all other proposed boost-phase defense systems, they must get
from their orbital bases to the threat missile just as fast, with the same very short decision times,
17Missile Defense Agency. 2010. “ALTB Questions in Preparation for March 16-18 Presentations to the National
Academy of Sciences,” March 17.
18DOD Office of Testing and Evaluation. 2010. “Airborne Laser (ABL) Assessment of Operational
Effectiveness, Suitability, and Survivability,” January.
19Missile Defense Agency. 2010. “ALTB Questions in Preparation for March 16-18 Presentations to the National
Academy of Sciences,” March 17.
20Ibid.
21Additional information and analysis can be found in the classified annex (Appendix J).
2-22
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
and to be close enough to do. If the interceptors are to be constantly in a position to intercept,
many platforms would be needed that must obey the laws of orbital mechanics. In addition it
would be very expensive to put them into orbit and sustain them there in the first place.
Figure 2-17 illustrates how SBIs fly out from their storage orbit to engage ascending
missiles during their boost. The SBI circles Earth in its storage orbit at some velocity and
altitude. When dispatched to intercept a missile during boost, the SBI fires, adding more
velocity to reach the threat. Since that fly-out velocity can be added in any direction with high
Like a terrestrial-based boost-phase interceptor, until detected and tracked long enough to know
in which direction it is roughly headed, an SBI cannot be flown out from its storage bus or
garage on orbit. While space-based interceptors do not have to deal with flying out through
atmospheric drag, and therefore for similar fly-out velocities can be smaller, they have to be
boosted into orbit along with their host vehicle or garage. There is therefore a very great
sensitivity to each kilogram of mass in the space-based interceptor, particularly in the kill stage.
Specifically, after being boosted into orbit, the kill stage must be flown out from the orbiting
garage at high acceleration and greater velocity in order to maximize its reach in the optimum-
sized constellation. The result is a need for hundreds of SBIs to handle just the relatively slow
liquid-propellant threats, and 2,000 or more to have a shot at the faster solid-propellant threats
during their boost. Constellation sizing trades are discussed next.
Nations like North Korea and Iran lie between 25 and 42 degrees north latitude. Missiles
fired from those countries toward the United States will burn out several hundred kilometers
further north. So, the number of satellites required in the constellation is that number needed to
always have at least one (and preferably two) close enough to reach a booster after it is
launched—in all cases before booster burnout but (like all other boost-phase intercepts) before it
FIGURE 2-17 Area and volume coverage from orbit of space-based interceptors. SOURCE: Adapted from Figure
4.12 in David K. Barton, Roger Falcone, Daniel Kleppner, Frederick K. Lamb, Ming K. Lau, Harvey L. Lynch,
David Moncton, et al., 2004, Report of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept
Systems for National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues, American Physical Society, College Park,
Md., October 5, p. S60.
2-23
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
reaches the velocity that would hit an area one wants to avoid—certainly Canadian or U. S.
territory and, probably also, Russian or Chinese territory.
The laws of orbital mechanics mean that the minimum number of space-based
interceptors must be in inclined orbits of at least 45 degrees. The population of SBIs is
determined once again by the fly-out speed of the orbital interceptor and the time available,
taking decision time into account, for the orbital interceptor to get from its storage orbit to the
threat at its fly-out speed. This in turn defines the so-called absentee ratio—that is, the total
number of interceptors required to be orbiting Earth every 90 min or so to assure that at least one
is close enough to engage a single threat missile launched at any time. Even if it is assumed that
North Korea would deploy only slow liquid-fueled missiles like those that it currently uses,
several hundred satellites would be required in the constellation to have a reasonable probability
of engaging a single threat missile. If and when these countries apply the solid rocket
technology that Iran is pursuing—a natural response to such a defense deployment—several
thousand interceptors would need to be maintained in orbit.
Figures 2-18 and 2-19 show the probability that one or more satellites are within range
P (≥ 1) and the probability that two or more satellites are within range P (≥ 2) as a function of the
number of satellites in the constellation (N ). The probabilities are shown for decision times of
sat
0 and 30 sec, and for notional 5.0 km/sec interceptors. The upper figure is for solid-propellant
ICBMs and the lower figure is for liquid-propellant ICBMs. The assumed threats are for ICBMs
launched from Iran. These cases are more stressing than launches from North Korea, even
though the timeline is longer, because the greater concentration of satellites at the higher latitude
of North Korea improves the coverage. The lead time for a country like North Korea to develop
solid-propellant missiles is likely to be shorter than the time to develop and deploy a space-based
defense system, which would probably be obsolete before it is deployed. Figure 2-20, created
from a Monte Carlo simulation, illustrates what a space-based constellation of 1,600 satellites
would look like, although even this constellation is not quite large enough to handle both liquid-
and solid-propellant ICBM threats. The cost of a system capable of protecting against a single
launch at a time is prohibitive. Consider, then, what would be required to deal with a
simultaneous salvo of threat launches, a tactic that both North Korea and Iran have been
practicing. Unless the constellation is populated sufficiently to handle salvos, there will be much
leakage.
Potential Scenarios for Intercepting Hostile Missiles in the Boost Phase of Flight
One can envision scenarios in which intercepting hostile missiles in their boost phase of
flight appears practical. Here are three such scenarios; however, it is important to note that none
of the scenarios involves developing new systems such as ABL or KEI. Rather, each uses
existing systems.
2-24
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-18 Probability as a function of the number of satellites in the constellation for a solid-propellant ICBM
launched from Iran and notional 5.0 km/sec interceptors.
FIGURE 2-19 Probability as a function of the number of satellites in the constellation for a liquid-propellant ICBM
launched from Iran and notional 5.0 km/sec interceptors.
2-25
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 2-20 The approximately 1,600 satellites that must be maintained in orbit for a space-based boost-phase
system to counter the solid rocket technology being pursued by Iran. ©2011 Google, Map Data©2011 Tele Atlas.
Countering Early Deployment of Chemical or Biological Submunitions in Theater Conflicts
Chemical or biological submunitions deployed immediately after boost phase are a low-
technology threat that could saturate terminal and exoatmospheric defenses at shorter missile
ranges. Because such weapons are area dispersed and do not require precise delivery, it is not far
fetched to contemplate that if each is encapsulated in an ablative material such as silicone rubber
to survive reentry, they could be deployed immediately after boost phase. While not a game
changer on the battlefield, such weapons require the donning of protective gear, which would
impede and disrupt combat operations. Such weapons are far more disruptive to civilian targets.
The latter threat has been studied and found practicable when the short-range reentry heating is
modest and the means for thermal protection does not need to be sophisticated. In such a case,
the submunitions cannot carry and do not require individual guidance and control systems but
simply are ejected at low dispersal velocity.
Only boost-phase intercept, prelaunch attack, or midcourse sterilization of the threat
volume would be able to counter this type of threat. It is one scenario in which intercepting a
hostile missile in its boost phase of flight might be efficacious. Specifically, carried by
multimission aircraft as part of their ordnance load and having as their primary mission the
destruction of a missile launch capability or other ground target, such airborne boost-phase
interceptors could, once air superiority had been established, engage any weapons that were able
to launch in an adversary’s airspace. Alternatively, some form of volume kill—sweeping or
sterilizing the threat volume after the payload has been deployed—might be used. The sooner
this could be done after submunition dispersal, the smaller the volume that would have to be
swept but the more vulnerable the sweeper platform would be. Unfortunately, there is no
effective volume kill capability other than the detonation of a nuclear weapon.
Countering Ship-Based Theater Ballistic Missiles Launched with Early Deployed
Submunitions Against CONUS, Deployed Forces, U. S. Allies, Partners, or Host Nations
Some observers consider the possibility of attacks by short-range ballistic missiles
launched from ships near U. S. (or allied) shores to be a very serious potential threat. Transfers
of older liquid-fueled theater ballistic missiles (TBMs) to nonstate actors have already been
reported. Ship-launched TBMs with chemical or biological submunition payloads from rogue or
nonstate actors aimed at large U. S. coastal population centers would have no immediate return
address. While the prospect of a nonstate actor getting nuclear material (at least enough for a
dirty bomb) cannot be excluded, a simpler chemical or biological attack could do substantial
damage and might be an attractive option for such an actor.
2-26
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Because the launch point for such a threat would, by definition, be relatively close to U. S.
territory, boost-phase intercept could be practical. Existing SM-2 Block IV air defense
interceptors launched from within 50 km of the ship launching the threat could engage such
shorter range threats during boost phase, within the atmosphere. In addition, CONUS-based
tactical aircraft carrying weapons if developed for theater boost-phase intercept could be
scrambled to fly CAP either over any suspicious ship that evaded detection before reaching a
threatening range or until an Aegis ship arrived. For example, a fighter aircraft interceptor
platform equipped with an appropriate acquisition sensor and perhaps a modified AMRAAM
could be first on the scene for that mission if no Aegis ship was within 50 km.
These are not likely to be large-scale threats that warrant the development of a special
system to counter them, and modified existing assets could probably play that defensive role at
least for the coastal threat. Specifically, Aegis ships with some SM-2 Block IV interceptors that
can shadow suspect ships closely enough to engage any launch in its boost phase, followed by a
counterbattery strike on the ship itself, could be deployed on both coasts.
Countering Long-Range Missiles Launched from North Korea Toward Hawaii or the Mid-
Pacific
There is a case in which the relative geographical location of a threat country and its
potential target would allow boost-phase interceptors to be stationed routinely in positions from
which boost-phase intercept would be feasible. This case is the long-range threat trajectory from
North Korea to Hawaii or other mid-Pacific islands.22 Here, three conditions would need to be
met for such a boost-phase intercept to occur: (1) the threat would be coming toward the
interceptor launch platform (an Aegis ship in international waters, say) so the geometry is at a
favorable angle; (2) the boost-phase timelines would be long enough to allow a boost-phase
engagement in that unique geometry; and (3) an SM-3 sized interceptor would have sufficient
reach within a rational timeline, it would be externally cued, and its KV would have the
necessary additional agility.
It has been suggested by some that a capability exists for the essentially instantaneous
detection of a missile launch from its silo or launch pad, which would allow earlier commit of a
boost-phase interceptor and thereby somewhat extend its range. Of course, very early detection
would buy many seconds more of additional fly-out time for interceptors than would waiting for
sensor data (from a space-based infrared system (SBIRS)). Here, the idea would be to fire an
interceptor toward a nominal point in the fly-out corridor as soon as a launch is detected and to
update the interceptor during its powered flight, when better data are available, diverting it to a
better-predicted intercept point—with an intervening coast, if needed—before igniting a third
stage. Boost-phase engagement firing doctrine calls for the interceptor to be used this way to
divert during its powered flight in order to reduce the divert velocity and acceleration
requirement for the kill vehicle to deal with; however, it does not commit interceptors until the
threat’s heading can be estimated.23
Testing of Boost-Phase Defense Systems: Results to Date and Outlook
The committee was tasked to assess the past and planned test programs’ value in
demonstrating feasibility and the cost effective utility of the KEI and ABL programs. While the
22The “long range” condition reflects that some potentially significant targets, like U. S. bases on Guam or the
Japanese homeland, are so close to North Korea that a ballistic missile aimed at them would have too short a burn
time (and too low a burnout altitude) for a boost-phase intercept to be feasible from an Aegis inteceptor on board a
ship in the Sea of Japan.
23The committee also shows that it is counterproductive to commit an intercept earlier than the timelines shown in
Figure 2-3 even if the launch can be detected immediately (see classified annex, Appendix H).
2-27
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
cancellation of KEI and the realignment of the ABL program to an R&D test bed (with which
decisions the committee concurs) have made this assessment somewhat moot, the committee has
observations about both.
Kinetic Energy Interceptor
The KEI program was terminated after cost and schedule problems delayed flight testing
of the vehicle. Both stages of the booster had been ground tested and were deemed ready for
flight test, and simulations using some actual tactical warning and attack (TWAA) elements were
conducted with the battle management architecture.
That said, the committee believes the foregoing analysis illustrates that no matter how
successful tests might one day have been, the system would have had negligible utility as a
boost-phase system because it cannot be based close enough to adversaries’ fly-out corridors to
engage either long- or short-range missiles without being vulnerable to attack. Neither KEI nor
any version of SM-3 that will fit on existing launchers has enough reach to have military utility
as a boost-phase defense.
The committee agrees with the decision to cancel the KEI program as such, but the
booster rocket motors could, with some modifications, be used as part of a more effective
Ground-Based Missile Defense (GMD) system. The committee returns to this subject—a
recommended evolution of the GMD—in Chapter 5 of this report.
Airborne Laser
Several tests have been conducted with mixed results for one reason or another. None of
the problems have been fundamental to successful operation of the laser or its beam conditioning
and control. Several target missiles have been destroyed, but all the tests have been at ranges too
short to have any military utility for boost-phase defense. The limitations of the ABL are due to
the need to sight at low elevation angles through the atmosphere, which fundamentally limits the
standoff range for boost-phase engagements. No amount of future testing is likely to change that
limitation.
Accordingly, the committee concurs with the DOD Office of Testing and Evaluation
(OT&E) report, which concludes that the ABL has no operational utility for missile defense for a
variety of reasons, not the least of which is the illogic of placing such an expensive asset in
harm’s way because of that range limitation.24 The committee found no reason to believe that
ABL could ever be an effective boost-phase defense system, and it believes that the reversion of
the ABL to a research and development test bed was a sound decision.
There are logical applications that were identified by the Defense Science Board in an
unclassified report that do not entail such short reaction times, going in harm’s way, endurance
on station, or atmospheric problems at low elevation angles.25 Specifically, the single existing
ABL could serve as an emergency antisatellite (ASAT) device. The aircraft could on its own
timeline be positioned to deposit energy on a spacecraft for dwell times limited only by its entire
operating time at very high angles of elevation without going anywhere near an adversary’s air
defenses. Advanced high-powered solid-state or hybrid lasers could be tested on board as well.
24DOD Office of Testing and Evaluation. 2010. “Airborne Laser (ABL) Assessment of Operational
Effectiveness, Suitability, and Survivability,” January.
25Defense Science Board. 2001. Defense Science Board Task Force on High Energy Laser Weapon Applications.
Office of Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Washington, D. C., June.
2-28
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FINDINGS
Terrestrial-Based Boost-Phase Defense
Major Finding 1: While technically possible in principle, boost-phase missile defense—
whether kinetic or directed energy, and whether based on land, sea, air, or in space—is not
practical or feasible for any of the missions that the committee was asked to consider. This is
due to the impracticalities associated with space-based boost-phase missile defense (addressed in
Major Finding 2), along with geographical limits on where terrestrial (nonspace) interceptors
would have to be placed and the timeline within which such interceptors must function in order
to defend the intended targets.
Intercept must take place not just before burnout of the threat booster but before it
reaches a velocity that can threaten any area to be protected. Because of the short
burn times of even long-range ballistic missile boosters, the interceptor launch
platform cannot for its own survivability be so close to the territory of an adversary as
to be vulnerable to the adversary’s perimeter defenses, but it must be close enough to
the boost trajectory so that the interceptor can reach the threat missile before it
reaches its desired velocity.
Surface-based boost-phase interceptors are not feasible against a large country like
Iran for missiles of any kind unless the interceptor platforms are based in the southern
Caspian Sea. While it has been suggested that unmanned stealthy aircraft could loiter
inside or close to the borders of an adversary, the committee does not believe it to be
a feasible approach against a country with an effective air defense like Russian S-300
SAMs, in the face of which stealth aircraft will have a limited time of invulnerability
as they maintain station in an environment with a high-density air defense sensor.
Range Limits
In practice, the operational limits on both kinetic and laser interceptor ranges necessitate
that boost-phase defense platforms be located near likely launch sites (or, more precisely, near
possible intercept points). Locations that meet the requirements are available only in certain
limited circumstances—a relatively small threat nation and good access to areas near it over
international waters or friendly territory and outside the range of its air defenses.
For kinetic interceptors, range is limited by the short duration of powered flight for
ballistic missiles—approximately 180-250 sec for ICBMs (although some liquid-fueled types
may have longer boost times) and approximately 60-180 sec for short-, medium-, and
intermediate-range ballistic missiles.
Boost-phase defense of allies or deployed forces against shorter than intercontinental
range attacks requires even closer stationing than for longer range threats, because shorter boost
times and lower altitudes at burnout—which are the determinants of the windows for boost-
phase intercept and of the proximity requirement for both kinetic and laser intercept—are even
more demanding. Only in highly favorable geographic situations, e. g., trajectories from North
Korea to Hawaii and some other Pacific Ocean targets, is it likely that boost-phase interceptor
platforms could be located so as to overcome the time, distance, and altitude constraints.
Despite their essentially unlimited speed of “flight,” the use of lasers as the kill
mechanism does not avoid the requirement for relatively close-in stationing of the interceptor
platform. Lasers operate at the speed of light, but they are range limited because laser power
deteriorates with distance from the target. Moreover, although the laser beam reaches the target
at the speed of light, it must dwell on the target for several seconds to deposit sufficient energy
on the booster to destroy it. The altitude of the target at thrust termination and of the platform
2-29
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
for the interceptor also contribute to loss of power on the target, limiting effective ABL range.
The dwell time relative to the short duration of an engagement also limits the raid handling
capability of any laser ballistic missile defense system.
The net effect of these time, altitude, and range constraints is that both kinetic and laser
boost-phase interceptors must be ready to engage from within a few hundred kilometers of the
intercept point. As a practical matter, the interceptor platforms must be ready to engage on or
over international waters or friendly land areas. (It is sometimes claimed that stealth UAVs
armed with boost-phase interceptors could operate in an adversary’s air space. However stealth
is extremely difficult to maintain for platforms loitering for long periods in airspace under
surveillance by a reasonably capable air defense.)
Decision Time and Command and Control
Missile defense operates within the established military chain of command and employs
systems of control and authorization that are consistent with standard operational practices that
have withstood the test of time and suit real-world considerations.
In standard U. S. practice, weapons release authority is reserved for the higher command
echelons, indeed ultimately for the President as commander in chief of the armed forces.
Reliable and redundant communication links tie the release authority to the personnel in
immediate control of the weapons system in question. However, it is equally a principle of the
command and control system that requirements for higher-level authorization should not be so
inflexible as to delay action to the point of ineffectiveness. Rules of engagement—which can
change as threat conditions change—are guidelines for action, including when time or other
considerations make seeking higher authority infeasible.
The special circumstances of missile defense—the potential of a missile attack to do
massive damage, the ramifications of mistakenly destroying a foreign nation’s space launch
vehicle (or even a routine developmental test missile), the possibility of creating space debris (or
debris or even weapons falling to Earth), the compressed timelines and heavy reliance on sensor
data—make it difficult to strike the appropriate balance between higher level—ultimately
Presidential—control and sufficiently rapid response.
These problems arise for any missile defense. The flight time for an ICBM attacking the
United States from Iran would be only about 40 minutes, and all other flight times can be shorter.
The time needed to detect and characterize a threatening launch—probably on the order of 1
min—and the time needed to conduct the intercept after weapon release—on the order of 15-17
min for midcourse intercept—leave a window of only a few minutes for requesting release
authority, for the decision maker to consider and make the decision, and for that decision to be
communicated to personnel who control the interceptor system.
The problem is challenging enough for midcourse intercept, where the window for
engagement would be a few tens of minutes. Even more daunting would be the authorization of
a boost-phase intercept, for which there would be virtually no time because the interceptor would
have to begin the engagement within seconds of the sensors reporting that a hostile launch had
occurred.
The short boost period not only imposes limits (far more significant for kinetic than for
laser kill systems) on the time available for the intercept itself, it also means—for either laser or
kinetic kill—that there be very rapid detection of the launch; its classification as threatening;
tracking; decision and release authority to engage; and execution of release with all of these in
addition to whatever time is needed for the engagement itself. Accomplishing this in the time
available is a formidable operational challenge.
The short time for intercept raises an important policy question. To allow boost-phase
interceptors to be fired within a few tens of seconds of detection of the launch of the attacking
2-30
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
missiles, authority to engage would have to be delegated to the military personnel with
immediate control of the system. Indeed, in practice, the “decision” to intercept would need to
be made largely by a computer program, with human input essentially limited to confirming that
the system appears to be functioning properly. Accordingly, civilian and higher level military
authority would have to be exercised by determining the rules of engagement that were
embodied in the computer program rather than in real time during an actual attack.
Other Issues
A significant technical limitation of boost-phase intercept, in addition to those presented
by the short powered flight of the target, arises from the fact that ballistic missiles are
accelerating nonuniformly during powered flight, not to mention almost discontinuously at
staging events. This further complicates predicting the target’s future location, which for
kinetic-kill intercepts increases the divert requirements for the kinetic-kill vehicle. Also, the
target is accelerating rapidly, which means that the interceptor must have a comparable
acceleration capability. As a result, kinetic kill vehicles designed for midcourse intercepts will
have limited boost phase intercept capability even if one assumes they are stationed within range
of the intercept point. These requirements for boost-phase kinetic kill can be met technically, but
they add to the weight and complexity of boost-phase intercept systems.
A further technical and operational issue for boost-phase intercepts is that even a
successful intercept has the “shortfall” problem—that is, the potential not just for fragments of
engines, fuel tanks, and the like but also for an intact and armed nuclear weapon to fall on
friendly or neutral territory. Moreover, it is a misconception that a boost-phase intercept could
cause threat missile debris to fall on the country of origin. In short, it is physically impossible
for this to happen unless the interceptor is based in the country of origin and is close enough to
the threat launch point to intercept the threat in the atmosphere.
Indeed, by the time of intercept, which would take place relatively late in powered flight
and well above the atmosphere, the reentry vehicle (RV) would already have been given
sufficient velocity to continue on a trajectory that could extend into the original target area, or at
least into friendly or neutral territory, and produce a nuclear detonation on impact. In principle,
a kinetic-kill boost-phase interceptor could be aimed so as to impact the RV containing the
warhead (as contrasted to the booster itself), but ensuring such impact would be challenging,
because of uncertainties about the position of the RV relative to the hot rocket exhaust, which is
guiding the interceptor. A laser kill mechanism, even if properly aimed, would probably not be
powerful enough to destroy a warhead carried on an RV hardened to survive reentry. It might,
however, be possible to count on midcourse defense to deal with RVs that “escape” from a
boost-phase intercept. It can therefore also be concluded that none of these measures to mitigate
“shortfall” are likely to be effective, and that the consequences of a nuclear detonation on land
“caused” by a U. S. intercept would be so severe that a boost-phase system must constrain
intercepts to windows that minimize the risk of an RV falling on land. Such a constraint would,
however, add another significant limitation to the already extremely tight window for intercept.
Finally, boost-phase intercepts are not immune from countermeasures, including
hardening to reduce the booster’s vulnerability to lasers, spoofing precursor launches, and the
like. Iran has conducted tests in which several missiles of various types were launched nearly
simultaneously. A nation could seek to defeat a boost-phase defense by launching several decoy
boosters at the same time as the actual missile in the hope of confusing, or even overwhelming,
the defense’s sensors and data processors. Even more sophisticated countermeasures can be
postulated—for example, fractionated upper stages—though typically they come at a price to the
offense in terms of complexity and reduction in volume available for the weapons payload.26
26Additional discussion on decoys and countermeasures is provided in the classified annex (Appendix J).
2-31
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Overall Evaluation
As a practical matter, however, these other potential disadvantages would be dwarfed by
the fact that both kinetic and laser interceptors would have to be on platforms relatively close to
the targets. Even leaving aside how such proximity would expose the interceptor platforms to
attack, this range-determined constraint makes boost-phase intercept operationally infeasible,
because, except in a few cases, it would not be realistic to count on a boost-phase intercept
platform being close enough to effect intercept.
In particular, Iran is too large geographically (and its northern neighbors too unlikely
to consent to U. S. boost-phase intercept overflights or basing) to make boost-phase
operationally feasible, even against liquid-propellant ICBMs.
By contrast to Iran, the small size of North Korea and its long coastlines mean that
boost-phase intercept for ICBMs is not ruled out by geography, as long as North
Korea sticks to liquid-propellant engines, and a large enough interceptor such as KEI
could be based at sea, as explained below.
In general, boost-phase intercept systems are more feasible the longer the boost time
of the target missile. Therefore, they tend to be more feasible against liquid-
propellant missiles than solid-propellant missiles, owing to the longer boost times
associated with the former. However, it would be imprudent to justify boost-phase
intercept development based on its potential against liquid-propellant missiles when
solid-propellant missiles are an obvious countermeasure; such a system could become
obsolete as soon as it is deployed. In fact, the deployment of a boost-phase intercept
system would likely stimulate the development of solid-propellant systems if they
were not already being pursued for other reasons (e. g., solid-propellant missiles are
more suitable for mobile deployment and hence can survive better against air attack).
For example, Iran already has tested a two-stage solid-propellant medium-range
ballistic missile (MRBM). Boost-phase intercept deployment against liquid-
propellant missiles would be justified only if a hostile country does not, or cannot,
deploy solid-propellant ICBM technology, as was the case for the former Soviet
Union for almost 40 years. So far, there is no sign that North Korea is working on
solid-propellant rockets for longer range missiles, but it could shift toward solid
propellant, possibly with assistance from Iran, with which it has significant
cooperation. The question becomes, Should the United States invest in a boost-phase
system with some capability against liquid-fuel North Korean ICBMs if that country
might shift to solid-fuel rockets before or soon after the system becomes operational?
There may be specialized cases in which boost-phase defense is feasible because
either the threat must come toward the platforms or the platforms can be placed close
enough to the threat and in an adequately benign environment. For example, a boost-
phase intercept might be workable if the threat is North Korean medium- or long-
range missiles heading toward U. S. bases in the western Pacific and therefore flying
toward the Sea of Japan, on or over which boost-phase intercept platforms could be
stationed. In this situation, and comparable situations elsewhere, the platform
proximity problem is manageable, because the threat is coming toward the
interceptor.
2-32
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Space-Based Boost-Phase Defense
Major Finding 2: While space basing for boost-phase defense would in principle solve the
problems of geographical limits that make surface-based boost-phase intercept impractical, the
size and cost of such a constellation system is extremely high and very sensitive to the timeline
in which interceptors must be launched. As a result it is susceptible to countermeasures such as
salvo launches that either delay and reduce its coverage or squander space-based intercepts.
In principle, a constellation of satellites equipped with boost-phase interceptors could
be configured so as always to be geographically in range for an intercept. The
number of satellites required depends, in part, on the burn time and altitude of the
threat missiles. Shorter powered flights of solid-fueled threat missiles require many
more satellites for coverage. Shorter range missiles with their shorter burn times and
lower burnout altitudes cannot be engaged by space-based boost-phase intercepts.
The total life-cycle cost of placing and sustaining the constellation in orbit is at least
an order of magnitude greater than that of any other alternative and impractical for
that reason alone.
Overall Evaluation
Space-basing for boost-phase intercept would, in theory, solve the problems of proximity
that make surface- and air-based boost-phase interceptors generally impractical. In principle, a
constellation of satellites equipped with boost-phase interceptors could be configured so as
always to be geographically in range for an intercept. The number of satellites required would
depend in part on what threats are to be defended against. Shorter powered flight times for the
threat missiles would require more satellites for coverage.
A space-based system would have to overcome objections (and, arguably, legal
obstacles) to “weapons in space.” More important, a space-based system would be vulnerable to
the sort of primitive ASAT device that a country capable of deploying an ICBM would probably
be able to develop.
The most powerful objection to a space-based system, however, is the total acquisition
cost (both initial and replacement satellite costs plus launch costs) for the large number of
satellites needed for continuous coverage of potential threat launch locations because of the
relative motion of satellites in orbit to Earth below (see Appendix J in the classified annex).
Some 700 satellites would be required for defense against liquid-fueled ICBMs and some
IRBMs, with some residual capability against solid-fueled ICBMs. For confident defense
against solid-fuel ICBMs, as many as 1,600 to 2,000 satellites would be needed. The total life-
cycle cost of developing, building, launching into orbit, and maintaining in orbit, even an austere
and limited-capability network of 650 satellites, for example, would be approximately $300
billion (in FY 2010 dollars). The cost for greater capability would be correspondingly greater.
From an annual acquisition cost perspective, these relatively high costs over the time frame
estimated to provide operational space-basing for boost-phase interceptors would probably prove
unaffordable.
Airborne-based interceptors (ABIs) have been proposed for boost-phase defense and
possibly for terminal defense. All near-term systems on which the committee was briefed have
very limited boost-phase capability (intercept ranges on the order of 50 km). The limited ranges
of which a system would be capable do not allow boost-phase intercepts from outside the
territory of even a small country such as North Korea. Such a system would be viable only if the
aircraft could fly CAP for extended periods of time over enemy territory after air supremacy had
been achieved.
2-33
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
3
Alternatives to U. S. Boost-Phase Defense
Table 3-1 displays U. S. boost-phase and non-boost defense alternatives—essentially,
present and proposed ballistic missile defense (BMD) systems—that are examined in this report
in the context of their potential mission applicability. The non-boost alternatives include the
present and proposed systems beyond the boost phase of hostile missile flight—that is, in the
ascent or “early intercept” phase, midcourse phase, and terminal phase. This chapter provides
additional information on alternative systems to U. S. boost-phase missile defense as requested in
the congressional tasking. Specifically, an overview and analysis of the Ground-Based
Midcourse Defense (GMD) system; the Aegis ballistic missile defense system, with all variants
of the standard missile-3 (SM-3) interceptor; the Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense
(THAAD) system; the Patriot (PAC-3) system; and the Medium Extended Air Defense System
(MEADS) is provided vis-à-vis their potential mission applicability.
TABLE 3-1 BMD Systems Examined in This Report in Terms of Their Potential Mission Applicability
Supporting
Protected Area Terminal Midcourse Ascent Boost Sensors
Homeland THAAD GBI SM-3 Block IIB SBI DSP/SBIRS
ALHK MKV KEI ABL UEWR
SBI SBI KEI AN/TPY-2
KEI ALHK ALHK AN/SPY-1
SBX
STSS
PTSS
ABIR
Allies SM-2 Block IV SM-3 Block I SM-3 Block IIA ABL DSP/SBIRS
PAC-3 Two-stage GBI SM-3 Block IIB ALHK AN/TPY-2
THAAD SM-3 Block II KEI AN/SPY-1
MEADS THAAD ALHK STSS
PTSS
ABIR
Space-ISR
A/B ISR
Forces SM-2 Block IV SM-3 Block I SM-3 Block IIA ABL DSP/SBIRS
PAC-3 SM-3 Block II ALHK ALHK AN/TPY-2
THAAD THAAD AN/SPY-1
MEADS STSS
PTSS
ABIR
RQ-4
MQ-9
NOTE: blue, operational; green, in development; purple, being considered; red, inactive, terminated, or redirected.
3-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
PRESENT AND PROPOSED SYSTEMS
Ground-Based Midcourse Defense System
The 2010 Ballistic Missile Defense Review Report states that “the United States is
currently protected against limited ICBM attacks. This is a result of investments made over the
past decade in a system based on GMD. Because of continuing improvements in the GMD
System and the number of ground-based interceptors now deployed compared to potential North
Korean and Iranian long-range ballistic missile capabilities, the United States possesses a
capability to counter the projected threat from North Korea and Iran for the foreseeable future.”1
The GMD program provides a ground-based midcourse interceptor for protection of the
United States against ICBM threats. The National Missile Defense (NMD) program was
established on April 1, 1997, and Boeing was chosen as the lead system integrator (LSI).
Supplementing the Boeing effort on the booster, subcontractors include Raytheon for the
exoatmospheric kill vehicle (EKV) and the sea-based X-band radar (SBX); TRW and Northrup
Grumman for command and control, battle management, and communications (C2BMC); and
the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers for construction. Currently, the program is in Phase B
(product development), operating with an initial deployed capability. Key components of the
GMD system include the ground-based interceptors (GBIs), located at Fort Greely, Alaska
(FGA), and Vandenberg Air Force Base, California (VAFB); the Missile Defense Integrated
Operations Center (MDIOC), located at Schriever Air Force Base, Colorado (SAFB); and the
GMD Communication Network.
The GMD system interfaces with the BMD C2BMC system that provides target typing
and tracks to the GMD fire control system. Once launched, the GBI communicates with BMD
through the GMD fire control system using its in-flight communication system (IFCS) twice
during the trajectory fly-out. The GBI interceptors exist in two variants, Capability
Enhancement I (CE I) and Capability Enhancement II (CE II); the slight differences in software
and hardware result in differences in communication range and discrimination strategies.
At FGA, the GMD system is operated by the 49th Missile Defense Battalion. Currently,
Missile Field 1 with 6 silos and Missile Field 3 with 20 silos are operational. Missile Field 2
with 14 silos is under construction. Plans call for Missile Field 1 to be decommissioned
following completion of Missile Field 2. At this time, 16 CE I interceptors and 5 CE II
interceptors are located at FGA, with most of the interceptors operational at any given time.
Additional components at FGA include a GMD fire control and system trainer, two command
launch equipment sets, and two in-flight communication systems (IFCSs).
At VAFB, four CE I interceptors are housed among three operational launch facilities,
one test launch facility, and one dual-purpose launch facility. VAFB also includes two
relocatable IFCS data terminals.
The MDIOC, located at SAFB, contains two GMD fire control and system trainers,
which nominally provide for the operational-level command of the GMD system, although the
GMD system can be operated from the MDIOC, if necessary. The GMD system components at
SAFB are operated by the Missile Defense Element of the 100th Missile Defense Brigade.
The final component of the GMD system is the GMD Communication Network, which is
a system consisting of secure fiber- and satellite-communication links. Developed under MDA,
the GMD Communication Network will be transferred to the Defense Information System
Agency (DISA) in FY 2011 for maintenance and continued development.
In a typical engagement, a threat launch is detected by satellites and the BMD system is
alerted. Cues are then issued to radars that detect and establish tracks, and if other criteria are
met, interceptor release authority is granted. Engagements are controlled through the interceptor
1Department of Defense. 2010. Ballistic Missile Defense Review Report, Washington, D. C., February.
3-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
midcourse phase. Following weapons release and the three-stage rocket firings of the GBI, the
IFCS is used to relay in-flight target updates (IFTUs) to the EKV and to receive in-flight
interceptor status reports during the first communication event (see classified Appendix J for
greater detail).
Kinematically, the GBIs have sufficient performance to defend all of the continental
United States (CONUS), although the existing system is most effective for the defense of the
West Coast from attacks originating in east Asia. The defense of the U. S. East Coast against
attack from southwest Asia suffers from the long duration of autonomous operations following
its last IFCS event and the lack of early radar track information.
Table 3-2 lists BMD program investment costs, followed by the ground-based interceptor
(GBI) average unit procurement recurring cost breakdown of the missile interceptors.
TABLE 3-2 GMD System Investment Costs Through FY 2009 and Interceptor Average Unit Production Costs (FY
2010 dollars)a
Program Total Average Annual
Time Investment Investment AUPC
Frame (billion $) (million $) (million $)
Boost-phase interceptor 1993-1999 1.4 227
NMD DEM/VAL 1997-2001 8.7 1,444
BMD system interceptor 2003-2009 1.9 265
GMD block development 2002-2009 21.7 2,716
Total investment 33.7
GBI cost elements
EKV 29.8
Boost stack 19.8
Boost avionics modules 6.5
Integration, assembly, and test 14.1
Total cost 70.2
Total cost of next five GBIs 86.5
aThe current GMD system and previous predecessor system total program acquisition (RDT&E and Procurement)
investment sunk costs expended through FY 2009 are based on the sum of the fiscal year actuals reported from the
FY 2012 MDA Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP) President’s budget (PB) justification sheets submitted in
February 2011 and previous MDA (formerly BMDO) annual PB justification sheets. The committee requested all
life-cycle cost elements in constant FY 2010 dollars. MDA provided the committee with both the average unit
production costs (AUPCs) for the previous cost for five GBIs and an upper bound estimate for the next five
interceptors. Since the GBI costs were unlabeled, the committee assumed they were in constant FY 2010 dollars.
SOURCE: Missile Defense Agency. 2011. Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 Budget Estimates,
Justification Book Volume 2, Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Defense-Wide Procurement, O&M, and
MILCON, Washington, D. C., February.
Aegis System and Standard Missile 3 Variants
The Aegis system provides the U. S. Navy with a multimission capability for BMD,
antiaircraft warfare (AAW), antisubmarine warfare (ASW), and antisurface warfare (ASuW).
With respect to BMD, the Aegis system has an existing capability deployed for sea-based
midcourse defense and terminal defense and is in Phase A (concept development) and Phase B
(product development) with a family of system improvements at different stages of development.
The basic Aegis system consists of the AN/SPY-1 radar, Aegis BMD signal processor, Mark 41
vertical launch system (VLS), and SM-2 and SM-3 standard missiles. The SM-2 missile is
designed for endoatmospheric terminal defense against maneuvering targets, and the SM-3 is
designed for exoatmospheric intercepts against ballistic targets.
The Aegis system is capable of operating autonomously using organic sensors against
short-range ballistic missile (SRBM) and medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM) threats.
Recently, the capability has been added to operate in a launch-on-remote (LOR) mode, whereby
the missile launching ship does not maintain its own track of the target at launch but rather uses
3-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
information from other Aegis or BMD sensors (e. g., a land-based AN/TPY-2 radar). In the LOR
concept, the engagement is controlled and in-flight target updates are provided from the
launching ship. The Aegis program is also working to develop an engage-on-remote (EOR)
capability by 2015, wherein the interceptor can be launched using any available target track and
engagement is controlled from in-flight target updates that can be provided to the interceptor
missile from any Aegis AN/SPY-1 or AN/TYP-2 radar. By 2015 this projected capability will
significantly improve the utlility of the SM-3 Block II in both early and late midcourse
engagements.
Since its first successful BMD intercept in January 2002, the Aegis system has undergone
an extensive series of flight tests, including tests with no notice to the firing ship (Flight Test
Mission (FTM) 04-1, February 2005), against a target with a separating warhead (FTM 04-2,
November 2005), in conjunction with coalition partners (FTM 10, June 2006), against
simultaneous BMD and AAW threats (FTM 11, April 2007), against dual SRBM targets (FTM
13, November 2007), and using LOR operations (satellite intercept, February 2008). The first
fleet firing of the SM-3 occurred during PACBLITZ 08 in November 2008.
The Aegis BMD provides a proven capability for midcourse defense against certain
classes of SRBMs and MRBMs. The system has the advantage of being housed on ships, so
redeployment of BMD assets is possible, providing flexibility in the defense system. One
challenge associated with the integration of the BMD capability on the Aegis multimission
platform is that the competing missions may sometimes require deployment in nonideal locations
from the BMD perspective.
Kinematically, the Aegis interceptors have about 50 percent of the burnout velocity
provided by the GBI, which results in a more limited defended area, and its smaller kinetic kill
vehicle (KKV) divert capability requires more accurate target tracking prior to committing the
SM-3 interceptor missile.
The standard missile SM-3 Block IA interceptor missile together with Aegis weapon
system (AWS) 3.6.1 is currently deployed for defense against short- and medium-range ballistic
missiles and has a limited capability against intermediate-range ballistic missiles (IRBMs).
Initially deployed in 2006, 112 missiles will be acquired by the end of FY 2012.
The SM-3 Block IA missile is launched from the Mk-41 VLS and consists of a 21-in.
diameter Mk 72 booster, a 13.6-in. diameter Mk-104 dual-thrust rocket motor (DTRM), a 13.6-
in. diameter third-stage rocket motor (TSRM), and a kill vehicle (KV) that uses a solid DACS
and a one-color sensor. The KV maintains continuous communications with the launch platform
throughout its full trajectory. AWS 3.6.1 retains the multimission capability for AAW, ASW,
and ASuW. Following launch of the SM-3 Block 1A, the missile is command guided through its
first three stages.
The sea-based terminal Aegis capability is provided using the SM-2 Block IV missile.
Originally deployed in 2008, this system has performance against SRBMs and MRBMs. The
SM-2 Block IV interceptor consists of the Mk-72 booster, Mk-104 DTRM, a blast fragmenting
warhead, and a semiactive guidance system. The SM-2 Block IV missile provides an
endoatmospheric intercept capability against maneuvering targets. A long-term replacement for
the sea-based terminal interceptor is currently under development in a Phase A (concept
exploration) program. This interceptor may also have some limited boost-phase defense
capability against boosting targets in the atmosphere, provided the ship is close to the target
missile launch location.
Table 3-3 lists the total investment cost of approximately $17 billion and the average
annual investment costs for the previous and current BMD Aegis programs from FY 1964
through FY 2009. The table includes all the predecessor program investments beginning with
the initial Navy-funded investments in the Aegis program, which consisted of both the
development of the SM-2 (RIM-66C) missile and the AN/SPY-1A radar beginning in FY 1964
3-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
and continuing forward with SM-2 Block I through IV program development efforts through FY
2002. In parallel, the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization (the original name) and now the
MDA continued parallel program investments to develop, first, sea-based and Navy theater area
ballistic missiles beginning in FY 1993, followed by the procurement of SM-2 Blocks IV and V
interceptors as well as VLS canisters in the FY 1999 through FY 2001 time frame.
TABLE 3-3 Aegis System Investment Costs Through FY-2009 (FY 2010 dollars)
Program Total Average Annual
Time Investment Investment
Item Frame (billion $) (million $)
Navy Aegis weapon system (RIM-66C SM-2 and AN/SPY- 1964-1985 2.5 115
1A)
Navy Aegis SM-2 Blocks I to IV 1987- 2002 1.2 140
Sea-based/Navy theater area TBMD DEM/VAL and EMD 1993-2002 6.2 686
SM-2 Blocks IVA and V and VLS canisters procurement 1999-2001 0.3 93
BMD Aegis block development 2002-2009 6.9 865
BMD Aegis procurement 2009 0.1 103
Total Navy and MDA investment 16.9
NOTE: EMD, engineering and manufacturing development.
SOURCE: Missile Defense Agency. 2011. Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 Budget Estimates,
Justification Book Volume 2, Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Defense-Wide Procurement, O&M, and
MILCON, Washington, D. C., February.
Phased Adaptive Approach
This new program was announced in September 2009 as a shield against Iranian ballistic
missile threats. Referred to as the Phase Adaptive Approach (PAA), the program has two
primary objectives that are often merged in public releases, causing confusion: (1) Phases 1, 2,
and 3 of PAA are evolutions to provide defense of Europe against MRBM and IRBM threats and
(2) Phase 4 of PAA, which is not yet well defined but is specifically aimed at improving
protection of the eastern United States against the potential of eventual introduction of Iranian
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
PAA reflects a change in the intelligence community’s estimates that indicated an
acceleration in the development of Iranian IRBMs and a slowdown in the development of
ICBMs. The four-phased approach was planned to begin in 2011 and is projected for completion
in 2020.
As discussed later, the committee believes there should be a clear distinction between
Phases 1, 2, and 3 and its objectives, on the one hand, and on the other, Phase 4, which adds little
or nothing to the defense of Europe and is aimed primarily at adding an early shot opportunity to
enhance the defense of the United States. Because PAA is still evolving, the details on siting,
host nation support, force structure, cost estimates, command and control, concepts of
operations, security, logistics support, were not available to the committee.
Phase 1 was planned to be completed in 2011 and consists of the deployment of Aegis
naval assets equipped when necessary with the SM-3 Block 1A for the protection of portions of
southern Europe against IRBMs.
Phase 2, projected to be completed by 2015, entails the introduction at sea and on land of
the SM-3 Block IB interceptor, which is under development. The land-based sites will
significantly improve the defense of NATO nations against IRBMs. Under Phase 2, Aegis BMD
4.0.1 will be certified for use in 2012. Included in this upgrade is the deployment of the SM-3
Block IB interceptor, which is currently being developed in a Phase B (product development)
program. The principal changes include upgrading the KV to contain a two-color sensor and a
throttleable DACS and modifications of the Aegis system to enable an increase in the number of
3-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
simultaneous engagements. A total of 324 missiles are to be acquired between FY 2011 and FY
2018.
Phase 3, planned to be completed in 2018, adds the SM-3 Block IIA interceptor and will
provide full NATO protection against Iranian SRBMs, MRBMs, and IRBMs (except for eastern
Turkey, for which separate defenses would be required because of the potentially very short
attack trajectories). Under Phase 3, the Aegis BMD 5.1 system will be certified for use by 2015.
This missile is currently in Phase A of cooperative development with Japan. Studies are under
way looking at conceptual canisters and boosters that can be operated from either ship or shore.
The Aegis ashore program is currently in Phase B (product development) and consists of moving
SM-3 Block IIA interceptors and their launching system to ground-based locations to provide
greater midcourse intercept capability over large landmasses. Initial deployment is planned for
FY 2015 at a single site.
Phase 4 is projected to be completed by 2020 and assumes the deployment of an even
more advanced SM-3 with better performance. It is projected to have an ICBM capability and a
kill capability for missiles in the ascent phase, and it will further augment the GMD system for
the defense of the United States.
Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense System
The THAAD system is being developed to enable both endoatmospheric and
exoatmospheric intercepts, primarily of SRBMs and MRBMs. In combination with Aegis, it
may also provide defense of high-value, small-area targets against longer-range missiles. The
system, which is designed to be deployable on C-17 aircraft, consists of six mobile launchers
with eight interceptor missiles per launcher, AN/TPY-2 X-band radar, and the THAAD fire
control and communications (TFCC) system housed within two tactical station groups. Plans
called for a fielded capability by 2011 with 2 batteries and 50 interceptor missiles available. To
date, 10 flight tests have been conducted, with six of six successful intercepts having been
executed.
The AN/TPY-2 X-band radar consists of the antenna equipment unit (AEU), the electronic
equipment unit (EEU), the cooling equipment unit (CEU), and the prime power unit (PPU); it
serves both search and fire control functions.
The TFCC consists of the tactical operations station (TOS), the launch control station
(LCS), the antenna support vehicle (ASV), and the cable support vehicle (CSV).
The interceptor missiles consist of a single-stage solid rocket with thrust-vector control
and a KV that can maneuver both above the atmosphere as well as in the upper endosphere. The
KV has a liquid bipropellant DACS, communications transponder and antenna, uncooled
sapphire window, and a single-color midwave IR gimbaled seeker.
An engagement begins with the AN/TPY-2 radar, through either cueing or through its
surveillance, detecting, and initiating target tracks. The radar collects medium-band and wide-
band target features for discrimination before the interceptor is released by the TFCC. A TOM is
developed from the radar and the designated target is identified. As many as seven IFTUs are
provided during the interceptor fly-out. Final target discrimination is achieved through TOM
alignment and onboard IR discrimination.
The THAAD system investment began with BMDO funding a DEM/VAL program
beginning in FY 1992 and continuing through an engineering, manufacturing, and development
(EMD) program through FY 2003 for the missile system, which includes the tactical support
group (TSG), launcher, and ground-based radar. Table 3-4 lists the total annual investment of
over $16 billion in the THAAD system from FY 1992 through FY 2009. This investment
includes the average annual investment over the first two phases of the development program
through preplanned product improvement of $872 million over this initial 12-year time frame,
3-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
followed by the MDA THAAD block development program continuing through the 6 years from
FY 2004 through FY 2009 at an approximately 29 percent higher annual investment of over $1.1
billion per year. As of the MDA FY 2011 FYDP budget, the THAAD program is completing
development and being deployed. The program began expending procurement funds in FY 2009
for low-rate initial production (LRIP). Even though the first 50 THAAD interceptors were
produced using RDT&E funds, the average missile unit costs are based on reported annual
procurement budgets and lot quantity buys beginning in FY 2010 and continuing at the rate of 72
per year from FY 2013 through FY 2015.
TABLE 3-4 THAAD System Investment Costs Through FY 2009 (FY 2010 dollars)
Program Total Average Annual
Time Investment Investment
Item Frame (billion $) (million $)
THAAD DEM/VAL, EMD and P3I 1992-2003 9.6 872
(including ground-based radar)
THAAD block development 2004-2009 6.7 1,123
THAAD procurement 2009 0.1 106
Total Investment 16.4
SOURCE: Missile Defense Agency. 2011. Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 Budget Estimates,
Justification Book Volume 2, Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Defense-Wide Procurement, O&M, and
MILCON, Washington, D. C., February.
Patriot System
The PAC-3 system allows the U. S. Army to provide air defense protection against TBM
threats, air-breathing threats (ABTs), and cruise missile (CM) threats to critical assets and
maneuver forces belonging to a corps and to echelons above corps.
The PAC-3 achieved initial operating capability (IOC) in June 2004 with a full battalion
consisting of fire units and missiles. A firing battery consists of a multifunctional phased-array
radar set (RS), an electronic power plant (EPP), an engagement control station (ECS), and two
dual-capable PAC-3 launcher stations. A radar provides surveillance and missile guidance from
launch through midcourse maneuver, terminal engagement, and intercept.
Following target acquisition by the radar, the target trajectory and intercept point are
supplied by the fire control system. The missile is launched with an inertial fly-out toward the
predicted intercept, with command guidance during midcourse. Following onboard acquisition
of the target, terminal homing is provided using rapid response attitude control thrusters with the
active missile seeker providing the necessary guidance accuracy. In the endgame following final
homing maneuvers, the lethality enhancement system is fired.
The PAC-3 has conducted 31 successful flight tests since 1997 for an average of over two
flight tests per year. There were also four PAC-3 missiles launched at TBMs in 2003 during
Operation Iraqi Freedom. An improved version of the PAC-3 missile, called missile segment
enhancement (MSE), is currently in development. Higher altitudes and longer intercept ranges
will be achieved using a new dual-pulse rocket motor. The MSE will also include a redesigned
lethality enhancement system.
Table 3-5 summarizes the total DOD and U. S. Army investment of close to $16 billion
from FY 1983 through FY 2009 beginning with the PAC-3 development program and continuing
forward for 21 years to FY 2003 at an average investment of $183 million per year. Since FY
2004, the investment in PAC-3 was and still is primarily the responsibility of the U. S. Army (as
highlighted in green), including the commitment of procurement funding for producing a total of
975 missiles through FY 2009. The Army’s LRIP of PAC-3 missiles began in the fourth quarter
3-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
of FY 1999 and the first unit was delivered in September 2001.2 The system IOT&E was
completed by September 2002 and IOC was declared in June 2004. Operations central (OC) was
achieved when the first PAC-3 operational battalion was fully equipped with five fire units (FUs)
and 32 PAC-3 missiles per FU. By the end of FY 2003, 268 missiles had been produced, and the
U. S. Army procured another 707 missiles through FY 2009.
TABLE 3-5 PAC-3 System Investment Costs through FY 2009 (FY 2010 dollars).
Total Average Annual
Program Time Investment Investment
Frame (billion $) (million $)
PAC-3 RDT&E (defense-wide) 1983-2003 3.8 183
Army PAC-3 RDT&E 2004-2005 0.2 122
Army PAC-3 procurement (QTY = 975) 1997-2009 9.0 696
Army PAC-3 modifications 2000 (est.)-2009 2.8 282
Total DOD and Army investments 15.7
SOURCE: Missile Defense Agency. 2011. Department of Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 Budget Estimates,
Justification Book Volume 2, Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Defense-Wide Procurement, O&M, and
MILCON, Washington, D. C., February.
Medium Extended Air Defense System
MEADS is or was a trinational codevelopment program that aimed to meet the future air
and terminal missile defense needs of the United States, Germany, and Italy. As such, it was
envisioned as a replacement for the Patriot, Hawk, and Nike Hercules systems. The program
was directed and administered by a trinational steering committee. The U. S. MEADS program
office executed the day-to-day management on behalf of the U. S. steering committee member.
MEADS has tenuous support in the United States, and the limited data and justification
provided to the committee were therefore not analyzed. Originally awarded in 2004, the
program had an objective for U. S. IOC in 2017. The system was being designed to have
capability against theater ballistic missiles (TBMs), manned aircraft, cruise missiles, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), and tactical air-to-surface missiles.
Within MEADS, a typical fire control unit would consist of two BMC4I systems, a
surveillance radar, two multifunction fire-control radars, six launchers with 48 interceptors, and
three reloaders. The pulsed Doppler surveillance would operate at UHF and provide 360-degree
coverage using a phased-array antenna. The multifunctional fire control radar would operate at
X-band with a phased-array antenna and would also provide 360-degree coverage.
ANALYSIS
As previously noted, this study is focused on assessing U. S. boost-phase missile defense
and non-boost defense alternatives to countering the threats identified in the congressional
tasking (e. g., SRBM, MRBM, IRBM, and ICBM threats) in terms of their ability to carry out the
established missile defense missions, all of which are congruent with those established in 2010
by the DOD in its ballistic missile defense report:3 (1) protection of the U. S. homeland against
nuclear attacks, other weapons of mass destruction (WMD), or conventional ballistic missile
attacks; (2) protection of U. S. forces, including military bases, in theaters of operation against
ballistic missile attacks; and (3) protection of U. S. allies, partners, and host nations against
ballistic-missile-delivered WMD and conventional weapons.4 A fourth mission was considered
2The majority of the PAC-3 historical information was based on the Patriot PAC-3 Dec-09 Selected Acquisition
Report (SAR) and the Army FY-11 RDT&E and Procurement Budget submitted in February 2010.
3See Department of Defense, 2010, Ballistic Missile Defense Report, Washington, D. C., February.
4For brevity, missions (2) and (3) are usually considered together because they so often defend against hostile
missiles of similar character although being defended against for different purposes.
3-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
as a collateral benefit but not as a requirements-defining mission: protection of the U. S.
homeland, allies, and partners against accidental or unauthorized launch.5,6
Over the course of this study, several tools were used to explore attributes of the existing
system, to evaluate potential increments to the existing system, and to assess the performance of
a modified system using new conceptual designs. The classified annex that accompanies this
unclassified report provides a detailed analysis of the present and proposed systems for U. S.
boost-phase missile defense and non-boost alternatives in the context of their potential mission
applicability. The following section provides an unclassified analysis that is based on a notional
set of threat missiles, interceptor designs and sensors where fly-out velocity has been varied
parametrically to explore the basic physical limitations of missile defense system performance.
Findings are then provided. In Chapter 4, a summary table of the systems for U. S. boost-phase
missile defense and of non-boost alternatives is provided, in addition to other unclassified
information.
Homeland Defense: GMD and PAA Phase 4 and Early Intercept of Threats
Against the Eastern United States
GMD System
The GMD system as currently configured has the kinematic capability of GBI to defend
large geographic areas if early threat track data of sufficient quality can be provided for
interceptor commit. The current GMD system configuration is northeast Asia-centric for defense
of the western part of CONUS and Alaska. Moreover, it is limited to an inefficient firing
doctrine. Currently, there are limitations in protecting the eastern United States from a threat
from the Middle East, as detailed in classified Appendix J. The boundaries of the existing GBI
kinematic performance envelope are established by the powered-flight exclusion zone
(commonly referred to as the interceptor “dead zone”) around the interceptor launch location
shown as the notch around the origin (see Figure J-1 in Appendix J of the classified annex). The
maximum interceptor time of flight and burnout velocity establish the outer boundary. The size
of the powered-flight exclusion zone is established by the GBI burnout velocity and total burn
time of the booster including any coast periods between stages and EKV separation from the
final stage plus the minimum time it takes to orient the EKV and engage the target. A minimum
EKV operation time results in a second powered-flight exclusion boundary. The outer boundary
is driven primarily by EKV coolant supply and the useful life of the thermal batteries used to
power the guidance and control systems on the EKV. However, in a tactical engagement
situation, many other factors may come into play that reduce the outer boundary of the kinematic
envelope. Examples include interceptor launch delays caused by weapons release authorization;
availability of data on launch quality from the forward sensor; communication link limits of the
interceptor data terminals (IDTs) in providing IFTUs and TOM handovers to the EKV for
acquisition and target discrimination; sun, moon, and Earth limb viewing avoidance during EKV
target acquisition and homing; and maximum divert capability of the EKV to take out initial
5Any BMD system would provide some inherent capabilities for defense against accidental or unauthorized
launch of a Russian or Chinese missile or, for that matter, one owned by another power. However, defense against
such attacks should not drive the design or evaluation of defense concepts, because the greater sophistication (or
numbers) of such an attack would tend to establish unrealistic and perhaps infeasible or unaffordable requirements
compared to those appropriate for a defense focused on the rogue state threat.
6Aside from political and stability effects, such defense is not practical, given the size, sophistication, and
capabilities of Russian and Chinese forces and both countries’ potential to respond to U. S. defense efforts, including
by increasing the size of the attack to the point at which U. S. defenses are simply overwhelmed by numbers. The
fourth mission is discussed in greater detail in the classified annex (Appendix J).
3-9
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
interceptor targeting errors. The lower boundary is at an altitude to ensure that the EKV is above
the sensible Earth atmosphere for reliable LWIR sensor performance.
The implications of these limiting boundary conditions are that a powered-flight
exclusion zone eats up the battle space around the threat midcourse trajectory. Significantly
shorter burn boosters and shorter launch decision delays would improve engagement
performance. Long-time-of-flight complications can be removed by having multiple widely
dispersed interceptor sites to reduce the need for extremely long-range, long-time-of-flight
interceptor trajectories, which permits an SLS firing doctrine as opposed to a wasteful salvo
firing doctrine, as discussed in classified Appendix J. It also permits more data collection on
decision time and target for more accurate and reliable intercepts.7 While it is kinematically
possible to defend the eastern part of CONUS against threat ICBMs from the Middle East using
GBI sites at FGA and VAFB, an additional GBI site located in northeastern CONUS would be
much more effective and reliable and would allow considerably more battle space and firing
doctrine options. The current GMD system architecture must be and can be fixed, as discussed
in Chapter 5.
Early Intercept of Threats Against the Eastern United States: Phase 4 of PAA
Separate and distinct from Phases 1, 2, and 3, Phase 4 of PAA has as a long-term
objective the provision of “early” intercepts of threats from the Middle East to the eastern United
States, which is poorly protected by the current GMD system. This is a complex issue for three
reasons: (1) the limitations of the existing GMD system and the modifications it requires; (2) the
size of interceptors needed in Europe to provide an “early” shot without being overflown; and (3)
the perceived threat of such interceptors to portions of the Russian Federation’s strategic
deterrent force and the effect on U. S.-Russian relations. It seems further complicated by NATO
missile defense objectives and how Russian participation in European defense should and could
be achieved.
The committee’s assessment of the Phase 4 early intercept augmentation of homeland
defense can be summarized as follows. The early intercept of potential threats to the United
States would require an interceptor with a fly-out velocity greater than 5 km/sec at the European
site to avoid being overflown by modestly lofted threats to the U. S. East Coast. For example,
Figure 3-1 shows notional ICBM trajectories headed for the U. S. East Coast flying directly over
a notional interceptor with a fly-out velocity greater than 4 km/sec based at the Poland site, but
that is less than that which could threaten any portions of the Russian Federation’s strategic
deterrent force. A slightly lofted ICBM (solid red) can overfly the kinematic capability of such
an interceptor.
The old controversial third site with a two-stage GBI was based on providing such
capability. Even then, to provide an early shot ahead of the FGA-based interceptors protecting
the western United States, the field of fire of Poland-based interceptors would be constrained to a
tail chase engagement geometry to avoid dropping interceptor stages on populated areas of the
Russian Federation, another likely bone of contention. Here, a notional interceptor based in
Poland such as that described in Figure 3-1 would not threaten any portions of the Russian
7In the 2011 Defense Science Board Task Force Report on Science and Technology Issues of Early Intercept
Ballistic Missile Defense Feasibility, it was noted, among other things, that “If, as an alternative to simply firing
salvos of defense missile at each incoming missile, time is available to fire one missile, observe what happens from
that engagement, and then fire the remaining missile(s) only if the assessment is made that the first shot was not
successful, then the potential exists to save significant defense resources.” 2011 Defense Science Board. Defense
Science Board Task Force Report on Science and Technology Issues of Early Intercept Ballistic Missile Defense
Feasibility. Office of Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Washington, D. C.,
September.
3-10
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Notional Interceptor vs ICBMs frp, Yazd; Two-Stage 50-sec Total Burn
FIGURE 3-1 Notional ICBM trajectories from Iran to U. S. East Coast.
Federation’s strategic deterrent force, would provide good coverage of Europe, and might be of
value to homeland defense under circumstances discussed later in Chapter 5.
If no AN/TPY-2 radar site is available in Turkey, Armenia, Georgia, or another suitable
location, the loss of early tracking and discrimination data would preclude the early intercept of
threats from Iran to the United States and would erode coverage for European defense.8 One
solution would be to base a radar on the Black Sea coast of Romania. However, an AN/TPY-2 at
that location would not have sufficient range to avoid being overflown by threats to western
Europe, and coverage against MRBM threats would consequently be reduced. Therefore, a GBX
version, described in Chapter 4, would be required at that location. Another potential alternative
being considered by MDA would be a version of the airborne infrared (ABIR) unmanned system
flying CAP, perhaps over the eastern Black Sea. Cost should be a strong consideration in the
event an alternative to the forward-based radar is needed.
The committee’s analysis suggested that any long-range missiles would likely be based
deeper in the heartland of Iran, near Yazd, while shorter range missiles would be based near
Tabriz. The basing of ICBMs or MRBMs in silos near Qom raises a question about the value of
an Aegis ship in the Black Sea. The committee set aside the obvious operations issues of
maintaining an Aegis ship in the southeastern Black Sea in examining engagement effectiveness
(see classified Appendix J for greater detail).
8The Obama administration signed an accord with Turkey in September 2011 for the U. S. military to operate a
high-power X-band radar station in Malatya Province, which is approximately 400 miles west of Iran. This new
radar capability combined with similar U. S. naval ship radars is expected to provide early warning of Iranian missile
activity.
3-11
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Defense of Deployed Forces and U. S. Allies, Partners, and Host Nations
Deployed Forces: Aegis, PAC-3, and THAAD Systems
Against short- and medium-range threats, Aegis, THAAD, and PAC-3 are well developed
and suited to their individual missions (e. g., defending deployed forces), but there has been
limited interface among them. More attention is needed to the exchange of data and hardware
among these systems to take full advantage of the large investment already made in the form of
both procurement and operating costs. The newly awarded integrated battle command system
(IBCS) is intended to integrate data from these systems and provide the needed battle
management capabilities.
Inputs to the BMD data network already include those from the Defense Support
Program (DSP), the SBIRS, and the UHF early warning radars. Maximum use must be made of
these data to relieve X-band radars of unnecessary volume or fan search functions, allowing
them to concentrate their resources on tracking and discrimination at the longer ranges permitted
when properly cued to the targets. This involves little or no new investment.
Despite the recent cancellation of U. S. participation, it should be noted that the MEADS
UHF surveillance radar has 360-degree coverage against ballistic missile targets from every
direction. It could be a valuable addition to the BMD data network in support of THAAD and
PAC-3 by allowing those organic radars to concentrate on fire control rather than also spending
resources on surveillance.
A THAAD Block II interceptor has been proposed that would be fast enough to take full
advantage of TPY-2 radar coverage. Such an interceptor, if pursued, would expand considerably
the defended footprint for THAAD, reducing the number of batteries required to defend large
areas against medium-range missiles by as much as 30 percent. A faster THAAD Block II
interceptor would take full advantage of the TPY-2 radar. Since THAAD can take advantage of
atmospheric filtering, such a THAAD Block II interceptor could provide for extended terminal
defense coverage of high-priority targets.
THAAD and Aegis would operate as a layered midcourse defense and THAAD and
PAC-3 as a layered terminal defense.
U. S. Allies, Partners, and Host Nations: Phases 1, 2, and 3 of PAA
The early phases of the PAA have remained relatively stable during the course of the
study; however, their capabilities have not, particularly as discussions with European allies and
the Russian Federation continue. In PAA, the United States has developed a near-term approach
for the protection of Europe from now through the relatively near future based on the proven
technologies of today as the Iranian MRBM and IRBM threats appear to be developing faster
than previously had been envisioned. The proven systems are the SM-3 interceptor, the
AN/TPY-2 radar, and, potentially, the airborne IRST sensors. As the threat evolves, extending
the mission requirement to defend more or even all of Europe against MRBM and IRBM threats
will require three Aegis-class sites still using the SM-3 Block IIA. Coverage of Israel and other
Middle East areas against the evolved threat will require two additional sites, still using the same
interceptor. (Turkey, of course, will require its separate defense using THAAD or equivalent
against shorter-range threats.) These requirements assume single-shot defense of most areas is
acceptable. Universal SLS capability—which is desirable for more effective protection—would
require additional sites or terminal defense.
As was touched on, PAA has two primary objectives that are often merged in public
discussions. However, there should be a clear distinction between these two objectives because
they may lead to different development paths. Specifically, it appears that the first objective
(i. e., Phases 1, 2, and 3 of PAA) is to provide an evolutionary protective umbrella for European
3-12
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
and Middle Eastern allies initially against SRBM and MRBM threats such as the Iranian liquid-
fueled Shahab 3, with a nominal range of about approximately 1,300 km, or the newer 2-stage
solid-propellant MRBM, estimated to have a range approximately 2,000 km.9 Later on, the
capability would be expanded to protect against longer range IRBM threats to Europe. Meeting
this first objective would also contribute to the protection of U. S. forces that are within the
defended area. These forces and bases (installations), along with other high-value assets, could
be further protected by an underlay of THAAD batteries whose radars could also support the
LOR capability currently being tested to extend the reach of Aegis interceptors that are planned
as the backbone of PAA.
In Phase 1 of PAA, before any new capabilities are available, existing Aegis ships with
SM-3 Block 1A interceptors in the eastern and western Mediterranean and the North Sea can
provide limited interim protection. If a THAAD radar were placed forward—for example, in
eastern Turkey or, as currently in Israel—that radar, cued by SBIRS, would provide LOR data to
increase the coverage of the SM-3 interceptors currently constrained by the SPY-1 shipboard
radar. In Phase 2 of the PAA, two Aegis ashore sites—one at Deveselu, Romania, and another in
northern Poland—are currently planned. Here, AN/TPY-2 radars that are forward based would
support LOR capability and possibly EOR capability for Aegis SM-3 Block IB interceptors with
improved KVs. Phase 3 of PAA would introduce the higher velocity SM-3 Block IIA interceptor
and two new optical tracking systems to support early intercept.
The first of these two new optical tracking systems for Phase 3 of PAA is the persistent
(or precision) tracking surveillance system (PTSS), which is proposed as a constellation of 12
satellites for cold-body tracking. The other proposed optical tracking system is the ABIR
system, which is a two- or three-UAV system that is currently being field tested for early stereo
threat tracking. As noted in Chapter 4, PTSS seems both unnecessary and far more expensive
than other more effective alternative sensors for early track data using X-band radars. As noted
in Chapter 4, ABIR is also not well defined.10 Here, the new SM-3 Block IIA interceptor jointly
developed with Japan was planned to provide substantially more performance than the SM-3
Block IA or IB by using a 21-in. second-stage rocket motor; however, it has fallen far short of its
originally planned performance.
To meet the first objective of PAA, Phase 3 should include a capability for defending
against IRBMs that could put virtually all of Europe and most of the United Kingdom at risk.
The committee is aware that Iran appears to be working on larger solid rocket motors. For
example, one can construct a notional two- or three-stage solid-propellant IRBM missile based
on the same solid-propellant technology Iran has already demonstrated that could have a range of
approximately 5,600 km. Such a missile would be capable of reaching virtually all of the
Eurasian landmass.
9Department of Defense. 2010. Ballistic Missile Defense Review Report, February, pp. 5-6.
10The analysis of future ABIR systems in this report is necessarily sketchy because the ABIR program of record
was not well defined at the beginning of this study. Initially, the ABIR program was conceived as a Reaper drone
using the existing multispectral targeting system (MTS)-B sensor ball as the infrared sensor, possibly with the MTS-
B sensor moved toward the nose of the aircraft to allow better elevation viewing. Later the MTS-C sensor ball was
suggested to add LWIR capability. Sensors similar to the High-Altitude Observatory 2 (HALO-2) Heimdall sensor
have also been suggested. The committee did not attempt to assess the capability of different ABIR configurations.
However, it should be noted that LWIR capability is essential for cold-body tracking. In addition, tracking through
the zenith is required for long-duration midcourse data collection (comparable to requirements for PTSS).
Moreover, ABIR LWIR detection ranges should be at least 1,000 km to avoid being overflown by IRBMs. For
room temperature targets, this requires sensors with an aperture on the order of 20 cm, assuming that an LWIR
system noise equivalent flux density (NEFD) on the order of 1 × 10–16 W/cm2 can be achieved. For colder targets,
lower NEFD figures of merit are required, which, in turn, requires cold optics—a potential challenge for airborne
platforms. Finally, this system requires that two platforms be airborne simultaneously to provide stereo tracking for
range data.
3-13
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
European Defense Analysis
Figures 3-2 to 3-9 illustrate the notional capability expected in the European PAA, where
fly-out velocity is varied parametrically. Figure 3-2 displays the earliest and latest engagement
opportunities of a notional 4-km/sec fly-out velocity interceptor against minimum energy threats
from central Iran flying directly over the planned Deveselu, Romania site. This is the most
defense-favorable engagement geometry possible from that site. Figure 3-2 also illustrates that a
notional 4-km/sec interceptor at the Deveselu site could provide good coverage and substantial
battle space against IRBM minimum-energy trajectories, assuming there is a forward-based radar
that provides LOR capability.
FIGURE 3-2 Notional engagement opportunities of a 4-km/sec fly-out velocity interceptor against minimum energy
threats from central Iran flying directly over the planned Deveselu site.
Figure 3-3 shows the same interceptor’s performance against trajectories moderately
lofted. Such threats, which could reach 4,800 km or more to western Europe, could overfly the
kinematic capability of the 4-km/sec interceptor at Deveselu. Thus, in order to protect
southwestern Europe and the United Kingdom, one or two additional sites would probably be
required if or when the longer range IRBMs emerge. A faster interceptor with a fly-out velocity
greater than 5.5 km/sec would have a significantly longer reach and could not be overflown
within Europe. This can best be seen by looking at the single-shot- and SLS-defended footprints
in Figures 3-2 through 3-17 from notional engagement simulations performed during this
study.11
11These figures were generated from the committee’s analysis using Google Earth. ©2011 Google, Map
Data©2011 Tele Atlas.
3-14
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 3-3 Notional engagement opportunities of a 4-km/sec fly-out velocity interceptor against moderately
lofted threats from central Iran flying directly over the planned Deveselu site.
Single-shot coverage defines the maximum boundary of a defended area. SLS footprints
delineate the area where SLS doctrine can be enforced. SLS battle space is a measure of
robustness, important for allowing a delay in the decision to commit, for second-shot
opportunities to take advantage of initial discrimination results, and for replacing intercept
failures.
Figure 3-4 displays the resulting single-shot coverage for an interceptor with fly-out
velocity varied parametrically between 3.0 and 4.5 km/sec in steps of 0.5 km/sec against
minimum energy trajectories from central Iran, assuming EOR capability. Figure 3-5 and Figure
3-6 show the corresponding single-shot footprints for lofted trajectories and depressed
trajectories, again assuming engage on remote. In all these examples, the western boundary,
shown by the white arc, is determined by the maximum range assumed for the notional threat,
not by notional interceptor performance.
Figure 3-7, Figure 3-8, and Figure 3-9 show the SLS footprints against minimum energy
lofted and depressed trajectories from Iran for three different interceptor fly-out velocities varied
parametrically based at Deveselu, Romania and in northern Poland, assuming EOR. In these
cases no 3.0 km/sec interceptor capability was shown because its SLS footprints are either too
small or nonexistent.
3-15
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 3-4 Notional single-shot coverage for interceptors with fly-out velocity varied parametrically between 3.0
and 4.5 km/sec against minimum energy notional 5,600-km solid IRBM trajectories from central Iran. EOR is
assumed.
FIGURE 3-5 Notional single-shot coverage for interceptors with fly-out velocity varied parametrically between 3.0
km/sec to 4.5 km/sec against lofted trajectories from central Iran. EOR is assumed.
3-16
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 3-6 Notional single-shot coverage for interceptors with fly-out velocity varied parametrically between 3.0
and 4.5 km/sec against depressed trajectories from central Iran. EOR is assumed.
FIGURE 3-7 Notional SLS footprints against minimum energy trajectories from Iran for interceptors with fly-out
velocity varied parametrically between 3.0 and 4.5 km/sec based at Deveselu, Romania, and Redzikowo, Poland.
EOR is assumed.
3-17
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 3-8 Notional SLS footprints against lofted trajectories from Iran for interceptors with fly-out velocity
varied parametrically between 3.0 and 4.5 km/sec based at Deveselu, Romania, and Predzikowo, Poland. EOR is
assumed.
FIGURE 3-9 Notional SLS footprints against depressed trajectories from Iran for interceptors with fly-out velocity
varied parametrically between 3.0 and 4.5 km/sec based at Deveselu, Romania, and Redzikowo, Poland. EOR is
assumed.
The message of these figures is that an interceptor with fly-out velocity greater than 4.0
km/sec—and less than that which could threaten any portions of the Russian Federation’s
strategic deterrent force and is supported by forward-based X-band radar to provide LOR and
3-18
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
EOR capability—provides coverage of all of NATO Europe except eastern Turkey. This
message is, however, subject to an important qualification—namely, because the interceptors and
sensors could provide coverage of the continent does not automatically mean the defense will be
successful. The engagements needed for regional defense will in virtually all cases be in
midcourse, and the midcourse discrimination problem is not inherently any different for MRBM
or IRBM engagements than for ICBMs. The PAA (and the parallel efforts in the Middle East
and northeast Asia) depend for discrimination on the integration of information from radars
(notably TPY-2). While this concept is right in principle, the challenge is to accomplish
discrimination in practice, as demonstrated by rigorous and realistic testing.
Northeast Asia Defense Analysis
While most of the focus to this point has been on protecting Europe from evolving
ballistic missile threats from Iran, the evolution of the Aegis shipboard interceptor and its
interoperability with THAAD are also applicable to defense against the significant ballistic
missile threat that North Korea poses to U. S. allies and U. S. military forces in northeast Asia.
Japan is the first ally to participate seriously, by jointly developing with the United States an
improved Aegis SM-3 Block IIA interceptor, which figures prominently in its self-defense and in
Phase 3 of the PAA architecture.
Because of the short burn times and low altitude at burnout of missiles that could target
Japan and Okinawa, boost-phase defense is not practical even with the favorable engagement
geometry available from Aegis ships. Therefore midcourse and terminal defenses are the only
practical options available.
Figure 3-10 illustrates the single-shot footprints one can expect for interceptors with fly-
out velocity varied parametrically between 3.0 km/sec and 4.5 km/sec against North Korean
MRBMs (range of approximately 1,300 km), assuming EOR capability and an assumed second
forward-based AN/TPY-2 radar located near Hagi, Japan, to provide accurate track data. The
interceptor fly-out velocity is varied parametrically between 3.0 km/sec and 4.5 km/sec. As can
be seen, notional interceptors with speeds of about 3.0 km/sec with EOR are adequate for the
single-shot defense of Japan. This is less true for LOR firing doctrines, as illustrated in Figure 3-
11, and less so still if stand-alone operations are considered. The LOR footprint in Figure 3-11
does not vary with interceptor speed because it is constrained by the range of the radar, not the
interceptor flight speed (at least for interceptors with speeds above 3.0 km/sec). Figures 3-12
and 3-13 illustrate the single-shot EOR footprints against lofted and depressed trajectory MRBM
threats, respectively. From these figures, one can see that it takes only one site (located near the
center of the Sea of Japan) to provide single-shot EOR coverage for all of Japan regardless of the
trajectory on which a notional 1,300 km-range liquid-propellant MRBM flies, and two sites (i. e.,
ships on station in two areas in the Sea of Japan) if single-shot LOR firing doctrines obtain. If
one considers a more widely dispersed set of potential launch locations in North Korea, two sites
will be required for complete EOR coverage of Japan, at least for the slower interceptor speeds
considered here, and at least two sites in the case of LOR operation.
3-19
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 3-10 Notional ship-based single-shot EOR coverage of Japan: minimum energy MRBM trajectories.
Note Hagi FBX location is notional and EOR is assumed.
FIGURE 3-11 Notional ship-based single-shot LOR coverage of Japan: minimum energy MRBM trajectories.
Note Hagi FBX location is notional.
3-20
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 3-12 Notional ship-based single-shot EOR coverage of Japan: lofted MRBM trajectories. Note Hagi
FBX location is notional.
FIGURE 3-13 Notional ship-based single-shot EOR coverage of Japan: depressed MRBM trajectories. Note Hagi
FBX location is notional.
A shoot-look-shoot firing doctrine utilizing EOR to obtain better defense performance
yields the footprints shown in Figures 3-14, 3-15, and 3-16, again assuming that a second TPY-2
radar located near Hagi is deployed for the defense of Japan. These SLS EOR footprints shrink
3-21
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
relative to the single-shot footprints because less time is available for the second shot. Still, only
two, or perhaps three, sites are required to cover all of Japan for minimum energy and lofted
trajectories. Depressed trajectories become somewhat more problematic, with at least three sites
required to cover all of Japan. Therefore, SLS EOR coverage for the entire country can be
provided from two or three ship-based locations in the Sea of Japan using at least two forward-
based TPY-2 radars far apart on Honshu. A THAAD underlay defense can provide additional
protection if desired. This should provide an effective defense of Japan against North Korean
MRBMs for the foreseeable future.
Interceptor speed is not as crucial for the defense of Japan as it is for Europe, because the
threat missiles are shorter range and have lower apogees. The shorter distance between North
Korea and Japan means that threat missile detection can occur shortly after burnout, with
accurate track data provided by two TPY-2 radars throughout the battle space. Nor is EOR as
essential as in Europe, because the intercept ranges against North Korean MRBM threats
directed against Japan are shorter and hence more compatible with the Aegis radar tracking
capability. Hence, offboard sensors are less critical for footprint coverage.
FIGURE 3-14 Notional ship-based SLS EOR coverage of Japan: minimum energy MRBM trajectories. Note Hagi
FBX location is notional.
3-22
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 3-15 Notional ship-based SLS EOR coverage of Japan: lofted MRBM trajectories. Note Hagi FBX
location is notional.
FIGURE 3-16 Notional ship-based SLS EOR coverage of Japan: depressed MRBM trajectories. Note Hagi FBX
location is notional.
3-23
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
South Korea and Western Pacific Defense Analysis
Defense of South Korea against North Korean SRBM and cruise missile threats was not
analyzed in any detail in this study, but because of the short burn times, low apogees and short
total flight time appear to be best provided by a combination of PAC-3 and THAAD batteries
located in-country. Because North and South Korea are so close, long-range artillery is also a
major threat but was not considered in the study.
Defense of forward bases at Guam (about 3,500 km from North Korea) and Okinawa
(about 1,500 km from North Korea) are essentially point targets that, like Hawaii, are each best
defended by local offshore Aegis ships working in conjunction with a THAAD battery ashore.
The THAAD AN/TPY2 radar provides LOR or EOR data to the Aegis system for the first shot
and the THAAD battery provides a second shot. This approach is discussed in the classified
Appendix J, where the defense of Hawaii is examined.
In addition, TPY-2 type XBRs located in Japan and Guam coupled with the Aegis higher
performance interceptors located on or near Guam can provide SLS coverage of the entire island
of Guam and an area of about 1,000 km diameter around and to the south and east of Guam
against a typical MRBM threat, as shown in Figure 3-17. The blue contour line shows the SLS
coverage footprint and the orange contour shows the single-shot kinematic coverage limit against
a typical minimum energy North Korean MRBM. Additionally, the use of THAAD for the
defense of Guam would be an excellent complement to Aegis coverage.
In summary, if also introduced as upgrades in the western Pacific along with THAAD,
the Aegis evolutions currently being considered for the first three phases of the European PAA
would provide the flexibility for defense of allies and forward bases against threats from North
Korea or any other countries, limited only by the number of assets procured and deployed in the
region.
FIGURE 3-17 Defended area coverage footprint against a North Korean MRBM threat.
3-24
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FINDINGS
Midcourse Discrimination
As discussed in Chapter 2, the formidable difficulties in being able to maintain boost-
phase interceptors in the necessary locations to enable defense even against long-range attacks
means that any operationally feasible defense against such attacks would have to effect intercept
after the boost phase is complete. While terminal defenses might serve as a useful backup
protection for extremely high value (or limited area) assets, the footprint limitations of terminal
defenses mean that an effective defense will usually have to occur during midcourse. In short,
there is no practical missile defense system that can avoid the need for midcourse discrimination,
and the midcourse discrimination problem must be addressed far more seriously if reasonable
confidence is to be achieved.
Exoatmospheric discrimination, by definition, requires identifying the threatening reentry
vehicle (RV) from among the cluster of other nonthreatening objects that will be visible to the
defense’s sensors after the end of powered flight. Initially the nonthreatening objects may be
unintentional—for example, spent upper stages, deployment or attitude control modules,
separation debris, debris from unburned fuel, insulation, and other components from the booster,
and the like. However, as threat sophistication increases, the defense is likely to have to deal
with purposeful countermeasures—decoys and other penetration aids and tactics like salvo
launches and antisimulation devices—that adversaries will have deliberately designed to frustrate
U. S. defenses.
Evaluating discrimination effectiveness is an uncertain business. One should avoid
overstating the ease that countermeasures that are theoretically possible can actually be made to
work in practice, especially against advanced discrimination techniques using multiple
phenomenologies from multiple sensors and exploiting the long observation time that midcourse
intercept makes possible. It is perhaps noteworthy that the experience of the United States and
the United Kingdom with the development of high-confidence penetration aids during the Cold
War was a mixed success. It would be difficult for an adversary to have confidence in
countermeasures without extensive testing, which the United States might be able to observe and
on which it might gather data that would permit defeating the countermeasures.
Decoys are not, of course, the only countermeasures a midcourse defense system must
face. Other possible measures to defeat defenses include maneuvering in midcourse and
structured attacks involving simultaneous launches and/or attacks on key components of the
defense, notably its sensors. As the threat evolves, defenses must adapt to these potential
measures as well as to increasingly sophisticated decoy-type countermeasures. The art of
midcourse discrimination, developed over many decades, does not provide perfect selection of
RVs, but by designing a BMD architecture based on the capabilities described in this report, an
adequate level of discrimination performance can be achieved in the near term and can give the
United States a reasonable chance of keeping itself generally ahead in the contest between
countermeasures and counter-countermeasures.12 The committee believes that the best approach
for addressing the midcourse discrimination problem is the synergy between X-band radar
observations and onboard optical sensors with a proper SLS operational concept and firing
doctrine, as described below. Midcourse discrimination is discussed in greater detail in Chapter
5 as well as in the classified Appendix J).
12There is no unequivocal answer to the question of whether a missile defense can work against countermeasures.
It depends on the resources expended by the offense and the defense and the knowledge each has of the other’s
systems. Thus, defense effectiveness against countermeasures inevitably will vary with time as the offense-defense
competition unfolds.
3-25
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Major Finding 3: There is no practical missile defense concept or system operating before
terminal phase for either the U. S. homeland or allies that does not depend on some level of
midcourse discrimination, even in the absence of deliberate decoys or other countermeasures.
The only alternative is to engage all credible threat objects (the Multiple Kill Vehicle program
was such a hedge). Therefore it is important to face the problem of midcourse discrimination
squarely and to maximize the probability of accomplishing it.
Initially the nonthreatening objects may be “unintentional”—for example, spent upper
stages, deployment modules or attitude control modules, separation debris, debris
from unburned fuel, insulation, and other parts of the booster. However, as threat
sophistication increases, the defense is likely to have to deal with purposeful
countermeasures—decoys and other penetration aids and tactics including salvo
launches and antisimulation devices—that adversaries will have deliberately designed
to frustrate U. S. defenses.
The midcourse discrimination problem must be addressed far more seriously if
reasonable confidence is to be achieved.
Major Finding 4: The synergy between X-band radar observations and concurrent optical
sensor observations on board a properly designed interceptor (which could be a modified
ground-based interceptor) closing on the target complex has not been exploited. The committee
believes a combination of a proper operational concept and firing doctrine taking advantage of
the battle space available for SLS offers the greatest potential for effective discrimination in the
face of potential future countermeasures. Although it is by no means a certain solution, the
committee believes this approach is not adequately exploited in current U. S. midcourse defense
systems (such as GMD) and needs to be if the United States is to have an effective defense
against limited attacks.
The importance of this three-way synergy—X-band radar observations concurrent
with optical sensor observations on board a properly designed interceptor together
with SLS capability—cannot be overemphasized.
This will require implementing a more realistic and robust program to gather data
from flight tests and experiments (including on flights of U. S. missiles) from the full
range of sensors, and making full use of the extensive data collected from past
experiments to continue developing the applied science from which robust
discrimination techniques and algorithms can be developed.
Major Finding 5: Based on information presented to the committee, it does not appear that
MDA takes into account how the signatures of various threat objects behave when observed
concurrently for several hundred seconds by both interceptor-mounted optical sensors closing on
the threat complex and X-band radar measurements. Moreover, it appears that virtually all of the
effective analytical work at MDA in optical signatures was terminated several years ago,
ostensibly for budget reasons. The Midcourse Space Experiment (MSX) and the High-Altitude
Observatory 2 (HALO-2) programs, for example, provided significant amounts of useful data.
Yet the committee could not find anyone at MDA who could show it those data or explain them
let alone the data from ground-based interceptor flight tests.
Forty years of optical signature data from well-instrumented past and recent flight
tests are lying fallow and unanalyzed with respect to current technological
capabilities. These include programs with acronyms such as designating optical
3-26
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
tracker (DOT), fly-along infrared (FAIR), the Homing Overlay Experiment (HOE),
the Queen Match Discrimination Experiment, and others.
While radar and optical midcourse discrimination technologies have been pursued for
years, they have largely been on separate tracks and more in competition than in
collaboration.
Homeland Defense
The GMD system at FGA and VAFB was deployed before its development was complete
in order to meet what was considered an urgent need to get a system deployed quickly. As a
result, GMD could not benefit from a normal development cycle, and it evolved in an
environment of changing requirements, with the end result that it is limited in its ability to
perform the U. S. homeland defense mission.
The current GMD architecture does not take advantage of technically available means of
discrimination or of effective engagement doctrine, but it could be modified to do so. Its
shortcomings are not limited to concerns about discrimination. The GMD interceptors are very
expensive ($70 million to $86 million FY 2010 dollars) even in comparison with other non-BMD
weapon systems of comparable size and complexity. To the extent the firing doctrine for GMD
would rely on firing salvos the expense can be even greater. Other limitations in the current
GMD system are discussed in the classified Appendix J.
Significant but feasible and affordable upgrades are needed to the GMD system and its
configuration and supporting facilities if it is to be genuinely capable of its stated mission of
protecting all of the U. S. homeland against the sort of long-range missile attack that North Korea
and Iran may be able to mount in the next decade or so if they press their development programs
forward. Specific upgrades are provided in Chapter 5.
Major Finding 6: To be credible and effective, any ballistic missile defense system must be
robust even if any of its elements fail to work as planned, whether that failure is due to a failure
of discrimination or to something else. Moreover, a properly configured midcourse defense is
the most cost effective and resilient method of defending the U. S. homeland against ballistic
missile attack. What is needed is a system that is resilient to failure, in particular the failure to
discriminate successfully. This implies making use of SLS doctrine that exploits the potential
battle space. The committee has analyzed the effectiveness of the discrimination capability of
the GMD system and finds that the system can, if it works as designed, deal successfully with the
initial threats from North Korea. However, the current GMD system has been developed in an
environment of limited objectives (e. g., dealing with an early-generation North Korean threat of
very limited numbers and capability) and under conditions where a high value was placed on
getting some defense fielded as quickly as possible, even if its capability was limited and the
system less than fully tested. As a result, the GMD interceptors, architecture, and doctrine have
shortcomings that limit their effectiveness against even modestly improved threats and threats
from players other than North Korea. Nevertheless, 30 GMD interceptors exist (or soon will),
and they and their support network of sensors—including additional properly chosen and located
and already fully developed ground-based forward X-band radar elements—and communications
could, at an affordable cost and on a timeline consistent with the expected threat, be modified,
emplaced, and employed so as to be far more effective for the homeland defense mission.
The foundation work for these modifications has already been done by MDA.
For example, GMD interceptors require a Block II ground-based interceptor
incorporating KEI-like booster technology having a shorter burn time and a new kill
3-27
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
vehicle with talk-back capability to permit using downlinked information from a
closing kill vehicle.
Defense of Deployed Forces, U. S. Allies, Partners, and Host Nations
The MDA and the Services appear to be on the right track for developing BMD systems
for countering short-, medium-, and intermediate-range ballistic missile threats from rogue states
to deployed forces and U. S. allies, partners, and host nations. However, while Aegis, THAAD,
and PAC-3 are well developed and suited to their individual missions against these types of
threats, there has been limited interface among them.
Major Finding 7: The Aegis ship-based SM-3 Block II interceptors with launch or engage on
remote—both of which capabilities are under development—together with the THAAD and
PAC-3 systems and their elements will provide, where appropriate, adequate coverage for
defense of U. S. and allied deployed forces and of Asian allies.13
With two or three Aegis ashore sites in Europe, that same combination can provide a
layered late midcourse and high-altitude terminal defense for Europe.
No interceptor with fly-out speeds less than or equal to 5.0 km/sec based in Poland or
Romania or elsewhere in Europe can engage or interfere with Russia’s nuclear
deterrent ICBMs or submarine-launched ballistic missiles.
Coverage of Israel and other Middle East areas against the anticipated threat will
require additional Aegis and THAAD assets. (Turkey will require its separate
defense using THAAD or the equivalent against shorter-range threats.) These
requirements assume that single-shot defense of most areas is acceptable.
Universal SLS capability, which is desirable for effective discrimination and other
purposes, will require additional sites or terminal defense.
Major Finding 8: The first three phases of the European Phased Adaptive Approach (PAA) are
expected to provide defense for Europe against a limited ballistic missile attack for deployed
U. S. and allied forces within the region and the Middle East, provided the sensor architecture and
the missile defense command and control (C2) center for the European PAA architecture can
implement engage-on-remote capability.
If modestly sophisticated countermeasures are anticipated for the IRBM threat, then
the European PAA will need to include multiple X-band radar and long-range IR
sensors (e. g., ABIR) that can provide concurrent data on IRBM trajectories similar to
the countermeasures proposed for U. S. national missile defense. However, the IR
data will need to come from external sensors because the SM-3 and THAAD kill
vehicles have limited seeker range and limited divert capability. Fortunately, Aegis
and THAAD are both capable of continuous communication between the kill vehicle
and the C2 center.
Europe can be covered with a SLS firing doctrine assuming enough sites are
deployed, where the number of sites required depends on the interceptor speed—for
13In the LOR concept, the engagement is controlled and in-flight target updates are provided from the launching
ship. The Aegis program is also working to develop an EOR capability by 2015, whereby (1) the interceptor can be
launched using any available target track and (2) engagement is controlled from and in-flight target updates can be
provided to the interceptor missile from any Aegis AN/SPY-1 or AN/TYP-2 radar. The committee applauds the
MDA’s progress in achieving LOR capability for Aegis.
3-28
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
example, two or three sites would be required if the interceptor speed is greater than
5.0 km/sec.
SLS, when combined with the sensor architecture and C2 center noted above, is
expected to provide a relatively robust defense of Europe against a range of potential
future countermeasures.
Turkey, as a member of NATO, will require separate BMD elements to ensure its
protection. THAAD is probably the most appropriate system for this purpose owing
to the stand-alone capability of its X-band radar and its ability to intercept shorter
range missiles.
Major Finding 8a: Phase IV of the European PAA may not be the best way to improve U. S.
homeland defense.
The speed of the Phase IV interceptor will need to be greater than can be achieved
with a 21-inch missile to avoid being overflown by lofted ICBM trajectories from
Iran if the interceptor is based in northern Europe (Poland).
3-29
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
4
Utility, Maturity, and Cost Effective Comparisons
Ballistic missile defense (BMD) is at a critical turning point if it is to meet the objectives
set forth by the current and past administrations. As stated in Chapter 1, the title of this report,
Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense, underscores three primary objectives in addressing
the congressional tasking: (1) to provide a sound basis for resolving once and for all some of the
claims for BMD systems, including sensors, which the committee found are possible in principle
but are based on an unrealistically constrained view of the threat, or that given the kinematics
and time constraints of the engagement problem, are not realistically achievable; (2) to
independently assess, from a user’s perspective, the effectiveness and utility of BMD systems
being fielded as well as those being contemplated for future deployment; and (3) as chartered, to
examine the resource requirements for each BMD system in relation to its mission utility. Here,
the examination of resource requirements is based on currently available program cost data as
well as historical cost data on systems with similar elements and considers the realities of
achievable concepts of operations (CONOPS).
This report recommends a path forward for improved BMD effectiveness and cost
avoidance. These recommendations include termination of some planned and ongoing BMD
development activities, instead building on development work done to a level that gives
confidence it can be successfully implemented in systems for the four missions examined in this
report. If implemented, these recommendations can be accommodated within the current budget
requested future years defense plan (FYDP) total obligational authority.
In the preceding chapters, an operational and technical assessment for U. S. boost-phase
defense systems and non-boost alternatives is provided. In addition to the assessment of
operational and technical elements called for in the congressional tasking, a detailed analysis of
cost was also requested. This chapter summarizes the committee’s comparison of operational
utility, technical maturity, and cost for U. S. boost-phase and non-boost systems. It is important
to note that the committee did not analyze personnel requirements for the force structure;
however, the BMD system deployment recommendations for U. S. homeland and European
defense are identified well enough to support further study of personnel levels. In general, the
Services have defined the force structure and performance that they can afford for BMD
missions requiring the use of Aegis, Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD), and
Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC)-3, and the committee does not believe an assessment of force
structure and associated costs was part of its tasking.
COMPARISON OF BOOST-PHASE AND NON-BOOST-PHASE SYSTEMS
Twenty-Year Life-Cycle Costs
Figure 4-1 displays the 20-yr life-cycle costs (LCCs) for the BMD systems—U. S. boost-
phase defense and non-boost-phase defense alternatives (midcourse, ascent, late midcourse, and
terminal)—examined in this report from FY 2010 forward. Here, the total estimated costs (in FY
4-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 4-1 20-yr LCC for boost-phase and non-boost-phase alternatives. (1) Where applicable, MILCON costs
included as part of procurement costs; (2) sunk investments based on kinetic energy interceptor heritage; (3) sunk
investment based on Aegis block development upgrade, design, and production heritage of SM-2 Block IV; (4)
CONOPS based on multimission use of retrofitted available F-15Cs and/or F-35s; (5) procurement cost includes
MILCON estimates for recommended missile field and facilities infrastructure construction costs on new
northeastern CONUS site; and (6) sunk investment cost for THAAD does not include separately identified past
funds for AN/TPY-2 radar.
2010 constant-year dollars) are broken down into three categories: development; procurement,
including military construction (MILCON); and operations and support (O&S) over 20 years.
These costs do not include the cost of supporting sensors, which is provided in a later section of
this chapter. Sunk investment costs from the start of these programs (or previous heritage
programs) through FY 2009 for these various BMD systems are shown in black.
Comparison of Costs and Effectiveness
Table 4-1 and Table 4-2 compare the BMD systems examined in this report. Table 4-1
compares U. S. boost-phase defense systems and Table 4-2 compares non-boost-phase defense
alternatives. The reader will recognize the programs of record discussed earlier in Chapters 2
and 3 but will also notice two other systems—continental U. S. (CONUS)-based evolved ground-
based missile defense (GMD) (called GMD-E in Chapter 5) and forward-based evolved GMD—
where the committee’s analysis and simulation work found significant weaknesses.
4-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE 4-1 Summary Comparison of Boost-Phase Defense Systems
Potential Boost-Phase Defense Alternatives
Kinetic Interceptors
Potential Mission Forward Tactical Airborne
Applicability Forward Land- or Sea-Based Space-Based Air- Based Laser
Operational utility
Applicable engagement Sensitive to basing, geography, and Poor against salvo Good only at Limited
resilience decision time. Cannot engage and unable to close range after by
missiles that burn out earlier and at engage shorter- air superiority geograph
lower altitude.
range missiles that y,
burn out sooner atmosphe
and at lower re, and
altitude fuel
Resilience to tactics and Sensitive to threat, short burn time, Brittle to threat, Medium
countermeasures and altitude burn time, altitude,
and salvoing
Technology maturity
System LCC (FY 2010 Land-based 11-13.8 a 187-311c 4-7.1d 30-43e
billion $) Sea-based 7-8.9b
Force quantity buys Land-based Total of 34 = 20 + 650 SBIs 4 F-15C CAPs = 9 aircraft
10 test KEIs + 4 constellatioin size 12 F-15Cs + 120
spares at two for boost phase of missiles (upper
locations with 5
liquids + bound use of F-
launchers +1
midcourse with v 35s)
C2BMC per site bo
= 5 km/sec and 20-
cm optics
NOTE: CAP, combat air patrol; CG, U. S. Coast Guard; DDG, guided missile destroyer. Color key: blue, system is
highly effective; light green, system is effective for most but not all expected threats; yellow, system provides some
capability but unclear how much can be achieved; orange, system provides marginal capability with serious
questions about feasibility; and red, system not viable.
a Estimates based on leveraging the terminated KEI program and sunk research, development, testing, and
evaluation (RDT&E) investment costs from FY 2002 with a 10-month study followed in FY 2003 by development
effort through FY 2009. Remaining efforts require continuing booster live-fire testing; completing the design of the
kill vehicle (KV) or multiple KVs (MKVs), interceptor integration and testing (I&T), and overall system I&T with
mobile launcher with canister; command, control battle management, and communications (C2BMC)/fire control
unit (FCU) system development and demonstration (SDD) phase span time estimated for another 4 to 7 years before
production go-ahead.
b Estimates based on Aegis SM-2 Block IV. Assumed development cost and procurement (FY 2006 through FY
2010) and fuze and autopilot modifications and installation on 18 ships beginning in FY 2008 through FY 2011 as
sunk RDT&E investment costs. Development cost only for bringing interceptor production restart and tooling and
for incorporating potential design changes due to parts obsolensce. SOURCE: Missile Defense Agency. 2008.
“Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense Status, Integration, and Interoperability,” May 6.
cLCC estimate updated using higher costs to account for developmental testing/independent operation testing and
evaluation (DT/IOT&E) testing prior to production and launch of space-based interceptors (SBIs) and the added
quantity buy for both on-orbit spares to reach full operational capability (FOC) and SBIs needed for replacing those
expended as part of continuous testing after FOC of one test per year for first 5 years and once every 2 years after
that to ensure C2BMC operational readiness.
d USAF/MDA estimated marginal O&S cost for multimission role and assumed USAF invests in F-15C service
life extension.
e Based on Congressional Budget Office, 2007, estimate of force of nine modified 747s to reach FOC.
4-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE 4-2 Summary Comparison of Non-Boost-Phase Defense Systems
Potential Non-Boost Phase Defense Alternative
Midcourse Ascent and Late Midcourse Terminal Underlay
Improved
Potential Improved Aegis: Land-
Mission CONUS-Based Forward-Based Aegis: SM-3 Based SM-3
Applicability GMD Evolved GMD Evolved GMD Block IIA Block IIB THAAD PAC-3/MSE
Operational Can SRBMs and
utility engage up cruise
to IRBMs missiles
Applicable Brittle Very resilient Very resilient With EOR With EOR
engagement
relience
Resilience to
tactics and
countermeasures
Technology
maturity
System LCC 16.4-20.3a 17-23c 6.4-9.2d 6.0-7.5e 9.2-11.5g, h, i 13.8-16.0j 25.6-33.5
(FY 2010 billion
$)
Force quantity Remaining 1 NE CONUS 1 land-based Projected Projected SM-2 9 Remaining
buys buy of 12 site with total of site in Europe SM-3 Block Block IIB batteries, buy pf 275
GBIs 50 operational IIA quantity quantity = 24 buy {AC-3s +
through FY interceptors + 48 (2 (1 dedicated quantity = 1,528 new
2016 to test assets (with dedicated European land 471 to MSEs
achieve 30 at new NE Aegis ships site) 527
operational site + 20 at or 2 Aegis missiles
quantity of FGA Ashore land
30b sites with 24
per site)f
Color key: blue, system is highly effective; light green, system is effective for most but not all expected threats;
yellow, system provides some capability but unclear how much can be achieved; and orange, system provides
marginal capability with serious questions about feasibility.
NOTE: MSE, missile segment enhancement (improved PAC-3); NE, northeast; QTY, quantity.
a Assumed GMD is the committee’s baseline for midcourse, so development and procurement (not separated by
MDA) includes RDT&E total investment cost (less sustainment) since national missile defense and total GBI.
b Total force quantity buy of interceptors through FY 2016 at FGA and VAFB. Procured 40 GBIs through FY
2011, and MDA budget in FY 2012 FYDP requested the addition of 12 GBIs—1 upgraded fielded GBI and 11 new
ones (GBIs 34 through 44) before FY 2016.
c Silo-based evolved GMD includes development, procurement (including MILCON), and 20-yr O&S cost for NE
missile field site and four new ground-based X-band (GBX) radars.
dUsed THAAD battery O&S cost (less TPY-2 radar) as analog for evolved GMD battery sustainment costs after
adjusting for differences in number of interceptors, launchers, and other system elements per battery.
e Based on the SM-3 Block IIA codevelopment and Aegis ashore RDT&E budget from FY 2010 thru FY 2016 and
buy quantity of 29 and the estimated procurement budget cost of additional buy of 15 SM-3 Block IIAs.
f SM-3 Block IIA estimated procurement cost is based on a force quantity buy of 48 operational missiles plus
additional test missiles based on a mix of either two dedicated Aegis ships or two Aegis ashore land sites each with a
20-yr O&S cost estimate based on sustaining a level of 24 operationally available missiles.
g Based on total RDT&E, procurement, and MILCON budget from FY 2011 through FY 2016 for a land-based
SM-3 Block IIB and a development cost estimate continuing out to at least FY 2019 and possibly out to the FY 2021
time frame.
hFY 2012 MDA PB identified MILCON for construction of land-based SM-3 launch facility in FY 2013 budget.
iThe procurement cost estimate is based on a force level quantity of 24 land-based SM-3 Block IIB operational
missiles plus additional test missiles located at one dedicated European fixed site. The O&S estimates are based on
continuous O&S of 24 operationally available missiles at one Aegis land-based site over a 20-yr period.
jTHAAD O&S cost includes Army sustainment estimate.
Table 4-1 and Table 4-2 present summary measures of effectiveness along with a range
of system LCC estimates and force-level quantity buys. Each effectiveness category is a
summation of many measures of effectiveness. The system LCC estimates are broken down and
4-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
discussed further in Appendix E.1 Factors included in engagement resilience are defended
footprint, battle space for failure replacement and follow-up shots, shot opportunities, leakage
and wastage for a fixed inventory, and engagement endurance. The operational utility rating is
an assemblage of several measures of military utility, including requirements for supporting
sensors and other assets; basing constraints and vulnerability to attack; persistence on station;
deployment time and cost; and amenability for high-fidelity operational testing while deployed.
A color rating is provided for each BMD system in each of the effectiveness categories as
well as cost. The color ratings are as follows: blue is highly effective; light green is effective at
relatively low costs with some weaknesses or lack of ability to handle all expected threats;
yellow provides some capability at relatively low costs but unclear how much can be achieved;
orange is a marginal capability at relatively low to moderately high costs with serious questions
about feasibility or affordability; and red denotes not viable for one reason or another along with
relatively high costs.
The 20-yr LCCs for each system are shown in the fifth row across, and the breakdown of
those costs for development, procurement, MILCON, and O&S are provided in Appendix E.
These LCCs include the additional LCCs for the supporting sensors for the alternatives shown.
A separate analysis of supporting sensors and their LCCs is provided later in this chapter.
The U. S. boost-phase defense systems examined in this report are kinetic terrestrial-based
(both land and sea), space-based, and air-based. As discussed in Chapter 2, no U. S. boost-phase
defense system that is land-, sea-, or air-based can defend against long-range missiles launched
from central Iran, where they would be based to protect them from attack as the United States did
with its land-based long-range missiles. While shorter range missiles might initially be based in
northwest Iran to maximize their reach, they could not be easily intercepted during boost because
they burn out sooner and at low altitude.
The land-based system of boost-phase defense is the now-terminated Kinetic Energy
Interceptor (KEI) program discussed in Chapter 2, which was determined to be impractical. In
short, KEI is impractical because it cannot reach boosting threats launched from the interior of
the countries of interest with any realistic interceptor or basing. As noted in Chapter 2, unless
they were based in China or Vladivostok, boost-phase interceptors could not achieve timely
intercept of a threat based in northwest North Korea. The situation with respect to Iran is even
worse. That this was not understood by those responsible for managing these systems raises
questions about the systems analysis capability of the MDA and others.
Sea-based systems for boost-phase defense do not fare much better. By virtue of their
ability to maintain station in international waters to the east of North Korea, they could engage
some threats launched easterly toward Hawaii while maintaining sea room. While one might
expect launches from North Korea toward Japan, approximately 1,300 km away, the boost phase
for such missiles terminates at low altitude, making them very difficult to reach unless the
interceptor speed is very high. For example, boost-phase interceptors launched from Aegis ships
would have a difficult time meeting such speed requirements due to the volume constraints on
the Aegis VLS system. Similarly, an Aegis-based boost phase interceptor would have difficulty
reaching liquid- or solid-propellant ICBMs launched from North Korea (which must head in a
north or northeasterly direction if targeting the United States) because of the lack of suitable
waters from which to launch such interceptors. Larger ship-based interceptors similar to the KEI
in performance were also examined, and it was found that these could not engage solid-propelled
missile threats headed to North America with sufficient sea room to keep the launch platform
itself from attack.
1In addition, Appendix E provides a detailed discussion and analysis of the cost sytem methodology utlized for
this study.
4-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Space-based systems for boost-phase defense are not geographically constrained and
have worldwide coverage within their inclined orbits. However, the number of satellites needed
is governed by the laws governing orbital dynamics, as discussed in Chapter 2. The resulting
high cost of placing a constellation of sufficient size in orbit is noted above, and, as Figure 4-1
illustrates, even the least ambitious capability costs an order of magnitude more to acquire and
sustain than any other BMD system. Specifically, it is important to recognize the break in scale
for the O&S costs of space-based boost-phase defense in Figure 4-1, which shows that O&S cost
is twice the cost of acquiring such a system.
Finally, the operational and technical limitations of an airborne laser (ABL) system are
discussed in Chapter 2. In short, because ABL’s laser range is limited, it has little operational
utility even if it is less expensive. Furthermore, the limitation of range is fundamental, and no
incremental improvements to the laser will affect this limitation in any significant way.
Of the non-boost-phase defense systems shown in Table 4-2, the Aegis program appears to be
well executed. While the SPY-1 shipboard radar limits the autonomous performance of a single
vessel, the implementation of launch on remote (LOR) mitigates that problem. The SM-3 Block
IIA missile—the first to use a 21-in. second-stage motor—is unlikely to meet the expectations
for performance improvements vis-à-vis the Block IB, and that has led to the consideration of a
possible larger diameter Block IIB, which is still in the trade-offs stage. PAC-3, THAAD, and
Aegis are on track for providing defense capabilities for U. S. forces and allies outside Europe.2
Moreover, THAAD and PAC-3 appear to also be well-executed programs although, as noted
later, the medium extended air defense system (MEADS) acquisition radar is a good candidate
for addition to the PAC-3 because it would allow the Patriot radar to concentrate on the fire
control task. In addition, the THAAD’s interceptor would perform better if it took greater
advantage of its radar capability.
SENSOR COMPARISON
In examining the present and proposed U. S. BMD systems, it is important to compare the
sensors needed to execute the four defense missions discussed in this report. Costs are provided
below, followed by the values and limitations of sensors supporting BMD missions.
20-Year Life Cycle Costs
Like Figure 4-1, which showed the LCCs for boost and non-boost alternatives, Figure 4-2
shows the 20-yr LCCs for each of the sensor systems considered either in place or to be acquired
for supporting the various BMD interceptors and alternatives. Sunk investment costs already
incurred for each sensor or heritage sensor system through FY 2009 are shown below the black
horizontal line in black.
Figure 4-2 displays two key messages. The first is that the United States has invested in
and is continuing to spend a great deal of money on a space-based infrared system (SBIRS)
constellation with the full operational capability to detect and track boosters and predict their
impacts quite accurately. The second is that having spent or committed the money for acquiring
and sustaining a constellation of SBIRS satellites for the next 20 years, we can buy and support
all the recommended additional supporting sensors for all missions for less than the total LCC of
the proposed PTSS, which, as will be discussed later, adds little if any value to support the real
needs of missile defense. If PTSS is justified for another reason, that reason has not been shared
with the committee.
2
For defending South Korea and even Guam, it was found that the boost-phase trajectories were so low that only a
system like THAAD, with its high endo- and low exoatmospheric capability, based in South Korea might be able to
engage hostile missiles during their boost phase. Here, ships with Aegis during the late midcourse phase or THADD
during terminal phases are the best defense for Guam, Okinawa, and Japan because of proximity.
4-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
20-Year Life Cycle
Cost (FY-10 B$)
$35
"Sunk" Investments Thru FY-09
SBIRS (FOC of
$30 4 GEO Sats 20-Year O&S Costs PTSS
+ 2 HEO Payloads) (9 to 12 Sats)
Procurement Costs
$25
Development Costs
$20
GBR (AN/TPY-2)
(QTY=11
$15 GBX Thru FY-2016) FBX (AN/TPY-2
(Stacked TPY-2 Array) w/Netted Comm)
(QTY=5) (QTY =5)
$10
SPY-1B/D ABIR (3 CAPs)
$5 Existing SBX
(QTY=5)
Moved Ashore
$0
SBX-1 Radar Dev +
Procurement MDA SPY-1 STSS (MDA) +
-$5 AN/TPY-2 Radar AN/TPY-2 Radar
Radar SBIRS-Low (USAF)
Block DevelopmenBtlo ck Development
Development
-$10
SBIRS EMD
-$15
FIGURE 4-2 20-yr LCCs for sensors for U. S. boost-phase and non-boost phase alternatives. Note that (1) the 20-yr
LCC estimate for SBIRS includes O&S costs of the replenishment GEO satellites and host satellites with HEO
payloads and associated launches needed to sustain the 4 + 2 constellation with an average expected on-orbit life of
10 years per satellite; (2) the 20-yr LCC estimate for Precision Tracking and Surveillance System (PTSS) includes
the O&S cost of the replenishment satellites and launches needed to sustain the constellation based on an average
expected on-orbit life of 7 years per satellite. HEO, high Earth orbit; GEO, geostationary Earth orbit; GBX, ground-
based X-band radar; STSS, space tracking and surveillance system.
With respect to the second message, it is important to note that SBIRS is a very important
sensor suite for missile defense as well as for tactical warning and attack assessment. This
successor to the Defense Support Program (DSP) is now partially operational, with two payloads
on host satellites in highly elliptical orbit and the first GEO satellite, which was recently
launched and is in position undergoing checkout. The second GEO is in ground checkout.
These sensors have a greater frame rate than the venerable DSP satellites, which are nearing the
end of their life.
SBIRS is important for almost all defense configurations because in most cases it is the
first detector and tracker of a threat missile, particularly those launched from the interior of a
country beyond the horizon of any radar. While its tracking precision requirement is based on
strategic warning and assessment impact prediction, it is sufficient to cue other threat acquisition
radars that are organic to defense systems. In fact the data are good enough to commit boost-
phase interceptors where time is critical as well as robust midcourse interceptors, although, as
will be shown, the committee recommends a second independent confirmation before the
midcourse interceptors are committed. SBIRS also cues regional defenses to reduce the burden
on their radar search capabilities, allowing radar resources to perform other intercept support
functions.
The next section discusses the value and limitations of each of these existing or proposed
sensors to support BMD in the various missions.
4-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Value and Limitations of Sensors Supporting BMD Missions
X-Band Radars: FBX, GBR, GBX, SBX
Equally important for defense of CONUS and the phased adaptive defense deployment
for Europe, the Middle East, and northeast Asia are the family of X-band radars that have been
developed. Ground-based radar (GBR), developed for and organic to the THAAD system (in
this case, AN/TPY-2), is being deployed in the Middle East as part of THAAD and also in stand-
alone form, called the FBX. The AN/TPY-2 is a very powerful and versatile sensor not only for
THAAD but also as a remote sensor to hand over track and discrimination data to other defense
systems. The FBX, which is a THAAD radar with some additional communication for netting
with other defense elements, is being deployed in Japan and is anticipated to be part of the
European deployment.
The current early warning radars at Thule, Greenland; Clear, Alaska; and Fylingdales,
United Kingdom, are lower bandwidth UHF radars that were developed and deployed during the
Cold War and have been upgraded to varying degrees. They can detect ICBM threats but have
limited ability to discern and track what is in a threat complex. The Pave Paws radars at Otis Air
Force Base in Massachusetts and at Clear, Alaska, are designed more to detect and track
submarine-launched ballistic missiles but are still limited in their ability to image. A third Pave
Paws radar, at Beal Air Force Base, California, is still active and represents a large investment by
MDA; however, it has very limited operational utility against intercontinental ballistic missiles
(ICBMs) due to its location. While all these radars can be used to commit midcourse
interceptors that have sufficient onboard sensing, autonomy, and divert capability to acquire and
parse the threat complex during fly-out, they offer little help in discrimination of decoys or other
countermeasures.
Accordingly, the GBX radars shown in Figure 4-2, which are X-band radars with longer
range, should be placed at these locations (i. e., at Thule, Clear, Fylingdales, and Otis) and at
Grand Forks, North Dakota, adjacent to the existing radar installations. To avoid the need for
developing a new radar capable of detecting and tracking threat objects in excess of 3,000 km, it
is recommended that (1) the SBX sea-based radar be moved to Adak, possibly placing that radar
on its turntable ashore, and (2) a new variant we call “GBX”be created by stacking two TPY-2
radar arrays one on top of the other and integrating their coherent-beam-forming electronics and
software to provide twice the power and twice the aperture X-band radar with a 120 degree by 90
degree field of view. These GBX radars mounted on azimuth turntables would be in fixed
installations and would provide, in concert with existing TPY-2s and FBXs, almost continuous
coverage of potential threats from North Korea to the United States or from Iran to the United
States and Europe.
One of the benefits of this approach is that it takes advantage of the learning curve of
transmit/receive modules, which are a large part of the cost of a radar. It does not, however, take
advantage of any next-generation technological advances, which invariably raises the price of
these devices.
S-Band Radar
The Aegis shipboard SPY-1 B/D S-band radar was designed as an air defense radar but
also performs well against shorter range or large-cross-section ballistic missile threats provided it
is cued from some forward sensor. Its value for both fleet defense and theater-level defense lies
in its mobility and endurance on station. All current and projected SM-3 interceptors are capable
of outreaching the ship’s radar yet depend on the radar for discrimination support, guidance
updates, and two-way data flow. The radar is, however, limited by its frequency in midcourse
discrimination capability. To get around the radar performance limitation against high-velocity
4-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
small-cross-section threats, the Aegis system relies on cooperative engagement handovers from
other up-range Aegis ships or another forward-based sensor such as a TPY-2. This is referred to
as LOR capability, allowing an earlier interceptor launch against longer range threats.
Airborne Infrared
The airborne infrared (ABIR) sensor mounted on an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) is
currently being evaluated for providing acquisition and track data for midcourse intercepts,
presumably when there is no forward radar available. Two sensor platforms are required for
stereo measurement. Because their range is limited by the altitude of the UAV, looking above
the clouds and the IR-radiating atmosphere, the number required and their vulnerability become
an issue. However, at least one version is being field tested. The rationale for this concept as
presented to the committee was never made clear, particularly how just two sensors on station
would deal with several missiles launched at short intervals. If a forward-based radar can also
view the interceptor as it flies out, then it could take over a communication with the interceptor
until its intercept is complete. This is known as engage on remote (EOR) and allows the
interceptor to fly beyond the range of the SPY-1 radar.
Precision Tracking and Surveillance System
Finally, the PTSS is the latest in a series of supporting sensor systems proposed by MDA
and its predecessors to provide midcourse tracking and discrimination to support missile defense
constructs. These systems, which originated in the 1980s, included Brilliant Eyes, SBIRS low,
the space tracking and surveillance system (STSS), and others and were aimed at making
satellites in low Earth orbit responsible for tracking the threats and discriminating among the
threat objects after their powered flight. The idea was to provide a very small target handover
volume to an interceptor with a homing kinetic KV that could be small and would have limited
onboard sensor, processing, and divert capability. Two experimental STSS prototypes were
eventually built; they have been in orbit for 2 or 3 years and are reported to have successfully
observed missile flights.
Conceptually, by putting more capable sensing and processing on a relatively small
number of satellites rather than on a much larger number of interceptors, overall system costs
could be reduced. The fewest satellites needed would be approximately 24 in inclined orbits,
and even then the sensor ranges required for the concept to be effective were great, which made
the discrimination problem more difficult.
The rationale for PTSS was never explained to the committee in any coherent way. It
was said that SBIRS could not provide adequate cuing for defense radars, which does not jibe
with what the committee knows about SBIRS capability. Moreover, PTSS was said to keep the
objects in view for a long time, from before deployment throughout midcourse flight, providing
midcourse discrimination even though it is generally too far away to do so and is limited to
viewing above Earth’s limb. The committee was told that the PTSS was a 9-ball equatorial
constellation with a 7-yr life that has since grown to a 12-ball constellation. (The system is
discussed in much greater detail in the classified Appendix J). The life of each satellite is now 5
years, which means that it will have to be replaced three times over the 20-yr period.3 Here, the
committee chose to use a cost in the middle of the range (see Appendix E).
As previously noted, one of the key messages in Figure 4-2 is the high cost of PTSS
compared to the costs of the other supporting sensors for BMD—that is, having invested in
acquiring and sustaining a constellation of SBIRS satellites for the next 20 years, or having
3Also, in a 2011 Congressional Budget Office report entitled Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue
Options, it is stated that “Construction of replacement [PTSS] satellites would begin within the next decade if the
design life of the PTSS satellite was less than seven years.”
4-9
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
committed such an investment, the United States can buy and support all the recommended
additional sensors for less than the total LCC of PTSS. Given these high costs, the utility of
PTSS was analyzed in depth. The findings of this analysis are presented in the next section.
FINDING
PTSS appears to be a solution looking for a problem. It has been proposed that PTSS
would provide detection and track data for early intercept by Aegis interceptors for fleet
protection off Taiwan and for the phased adaptive European deployment. Unanswered is a
question that could be politically sensitive—namely, why one or two THAAD battery radars on
Taiwan would not provide better data, since in realistic CONOPS for that scenario, it is unlikely
that any Aegis ships would venture close enough to effect an intercept in the ascent or early
midcourse phase. Instead they would more likely be east of Taiwan with the rest of the fleet and
would have to engage in late midcourse. While a cue will be needed for Aegis, a THAAD radar
on Taiwan could acquire and track small cross-section targets much further away than the
distance across the Taiwan (Formosa) Strait. This would seem a more logical, to say nothing of
a much lower cost, solution. The Shariki, Japan, FBX radar provides a very accurate track of
threats from North Korea to Hawaii and Alaska when propagated forward. Similarly, in Europe
the FBX TPY-2 radar can provide a better cue, track, and discrimination capability than PTSS
for the phased adaptive deployment of Aegis ashore.
The committee sympathizes with MDA’s desire for its own space-based observation
capabilities, because until recently, the Air Force paid insufficient attention to the needs of
missile defense in its space-based surveillance programs. Publicity surrounding the great success
of STSS in observing birth-to-death flight of missiles notwithstanding, PTSS utility is very
limited.
Moreover, setting aside its questionable utility, the proposed constellation is very
expensive compared to other alternatives. To test this conclusion, an analysis was done of an
ICBM launch out of North Korea toward Hawaii using only the FBX radar in Shariki, Japan,
cued by SBIRS or DSP, to determine the handover volume propagated some 600 sec forward to
acquisition by a GBX in Kauai with no other sensor help. This analysis is provided in classified
Appendix K, and the results confirmed the committee’s view that even in this long-timeline case
with minimal radar coverage, the forward-based FBX or THAAD radars together with the
recommended version of GBX are adequate for any handover and provide significant support for
midcourse discrimination, which PTSS cannot provide.
PTSS appears to have a more limited set of objectives: namely, it focuses on increasing
the coverage of Aegis SM-3 interceptors by providing accurate and more continuous tracking of
the threat objects during their midcourse flight. Presumably the stereo track accuracy from the
satellites would be suitable for launching an interceptor from the Aegis ship or shore base well
before its radar could acquire the target. Relayed in real time to the Aegis radar, these data could
then be transmitted by the SPY-1 to the interceptor (LOR) or even by another radar (EOR)
during its fly-out as part of its guidance function.
For the BMD missions examined in this report, the Aegis system plays an important role
in defending deployed forces and allies and friends and in defending against a limited or
accidental attack. The Aegis system also plays a limited role with respect to U. S. homeland
defense, Hawaii in particular. In most of these roles, LOR or EOR will be important.
In the PTSS construct, the tracking data would come from stereo-optical data available
from several of 12 satellites in equatorial medium altitude (1,500 km) orbit, 30 degrees apart in
longitude. At last check, these satellites would be cued on where to look by some sensor,
presumably SBIRS. These cold-body-tracking satellites must look above hard Earth and its limb
for threats launched from various latitudes, from 31 degrees to about 41 degrees North. There is
4-10
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
one exception, the antiaccess scenario around Taiwan, where threat trajectories could be at
latitudes as low as 22 degrees North and visible for less time above Earth’s limb.
Figure 4-3, Figure 4-4, and Figure 4-5 show several notional trajectories for threats fired
from the Middle East to Western Europe as seen from three PTSS satellites at a single point in
time.4 While the satellites move about 90 degrees during the duration of these notional
trajectories, there are always three of them viewing the notional trajectories from approximately
these locations. Figure 4-3 is from a satellite passing above 0 degrees longitude (Greenwich
meridian); Figure 4-4 is from a satellite passing above 30 degrees East longitude; and Figure 4-5
is from a satellite passing above 60 degrees East longitude. In short, all three satellites could see
large portions of these notional trajectories above Earth’s limb, with two of the three seeing the
threats before burnout, and would be generally looking at targets at slant ranges 3,000 km to
7,500 km away, thus making the system’s value for discrimination negligible (see classified
Appendix J for greater detail).
Tracking and imaging of the threat from a cued, forward-based AN/TPY-2 X-band radar
handed over to the suite of recommended X-band radars at the early warning radar sites provide
excellent data on the size of the raids and also provide initial threat tracking discrimination data;
they do this at an LCC between one third and one fourth the acquisition cost and the LCC of
PTSS. While PTSS is a hedge against the inability to negotiate a forward site for this AN/TPY-2
radar, the value added by PTSS is very low and comes at a very high cost (see Appendix E and
classified Appendix J for greater detail). For example, island areas, such as Hawaii, Okinawa,
and Guam are best defended against missile attack by Aegis in late midcourse with a THAAD
battery providing improved radar coverage and discrimination support and a second shot
capability if warranted.
FIGURE 4-3 PTSS view of notional 5,600 km intermediate-range ballistic missile (IRBM) as the satellite passes
over 0 degrees East.
4Figures 4-3 to 4-5 were generated from the committee’s analysis using Google Earth. ©2011 Google, Map
Data©2011 Tele Atlas.
4-11
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 4-4 PTSS view of notional 5,600 km IRBM as the satellite passes over 30 degrees East.
FIGURE 4-5 PTSS view of notional 5,600 km IRBM as the satellite passes over 60 degrees East.
Major Finding 9: The proposed Precision Tracking and Surveillance System (PTSS) does not
appear to be justified in view of its estimated life-cycle cost versus its contribution to defense
effectiveness. Specifically, the justification provided to the committee for developing this new
space-based sensor system was questionable, and the committee’s analysis shows that its
4-12
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
objective can be better accomplished by deployment of forward-based X-band radars based on
the Army Navy/transportable radar surveillance model 2 (AN/TPY-2) system design at much
lower total-life-cycle cost.
The AN/TPY-2 radar already developed for THAAD and already deployed can be
exploited to provide the required capabilities for all foreseeable defense missions.
Taking advantage of the existing manufacturing base and the learning curve as more
units are built would be a very cost-effective way of supporting the recommendations
in this report.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Boost-Phase Systems
Given the foregoing assessments of the feasibility of boost-phase defense and of system
alternatives in light of the objectives of the U. S. administration with respect to providing ballistic
missile defense capabilities both abroad and at home, it is evident that ballistic missile defense is
at a critical turning point. To that end, this section of the report provides specific
recommendations based on the committee’s analysis and the findings in Chapters 2, 3, and 4. In
short, the committee recommends that no more money be spent on boost-phase defense except
for continued R&D on laser technologies that could be useful for other missile defense purposes.
Indeed, the committee agrees with the termination of the KEI program and the transitioning of
the ABL program to a test bed. The committee’s assessment of the fragility and exceedingly
high cost of space-based interceptors and of the relatively meager benefit of what they provide
leads it to recommend that they not be considered further.
Major Recommendation 1: The Department of Defense should not invest any more money or
resources in systems for boost-phase missile defense. Boost-phase missile defense is not
practical or cost effective under real-world conditions for the foreseeable future.
All boost-phase intercept (BPI) systems suffer from severe reach-versus-time-
available constraints. This is true for kinetic kill interceptors launched from Earth’s
surface, from airborne platforms, or from space. It is also true for a directed-energy
(laser) weapon in the form of the airborne laser (ABL), where the reach is limited by
problems of propagating enough beam over long distances in the atmosphere and
focusing it onto a small spot, even with full use of sophisticated adaptive optical
techniques.
While there may be special cases of a small country such as North Korea launching
relatively slow burning liquid propellant ICBMs in which some boost-phase
intercepts are possible, the required basing locations for interceptors are not likely to
be politically acceptable.5 This recommendation is not intended to preclude funding
of generic research and development such as the ABL test bed, which is currently
involved in boost-phase intercept, or funding of adaptive optics concepts or advances
in high-power lasers that may be useful for other applications.
5For example, while a North Korean ICBM aimed at Hawaii and some other Pacific locations could be intercepted
in boost phase by a properly located Aegis ship, the United States cannot realistically or prudently expect that BPIs
intended for defense against North Korean or Iranian attacks can be stationed in Russian or Chinese airspace or over
other nonallied territory (or where overflights of such territory would be necessary to reach on-station locations), at
least short of a full resolution of Russian and Chinese concerns about U. S. missile defense and agreement on
extensive cooperation in such defense.
4-13
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Recognizing that boost-phase defense is not practical or feasible for any of the missions
that it was asked to consider, the committee believes it is important to examine the gain in
effectiveness versus LCCs for non-boost-phase defense alternatives as they evolve over time.
Figure 4-6 illustrates the evolutionary pathway of each non-boost-phase defense alternative for
each of the four defense missions, what they buy in effectiveness, and the incremental LCC
implications for pursuing each pathway. In this figure, there are two basic evolution pathways
for the specified missions. The first path, starting at the left column—defense of U. S. deployed
forces and host nations—is also applicable to defense of friends and allies. The second
evolutionary path, which starts in column two, shows the alternatives for homeland defense.
For each of the four defense missions illustrated in Figure 4-6 (one, for instance, is
“Homeland Defense Against Iran and Others”), the effectiveness of a particular non-boost-phase
defense alternative is rated by color (see the key at the upper right of the figure); 20-yr LCCs are
shown along the vertical axis. These costs include the cost of supporting sensors to reach and
sustain the end state, represented by the points where the lines for each defense alternative
terminate. They do not, however, include PTSS or ABIR being considered for later introduction
into the PAA.6 Figure 4-6 also displays the costs for each defense alternative from its inception
(see data in “Sunk Costs” at the bottom of the figure).
FIGURE 4-6 Effectiveness gain versus LCC. PAA, Phased Adaptive Approach.
6The source data for these defense alternatives are provided in the classified Appendixes I and J.
4-14
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The current buildout and sustainment path for Aegis SM-3 IA and B, THAAD, and PAC-
3 is shown in Figure 4-6 as a solid black line (see the line for the mission “Regional Defense of
U. S. Territories, Deployed Forces, and Host Nations”). When THAAD and PAC-3 are
completed, they will also inherently provide the initial mission capability for Phases 1 and 2 of
PAA (denoted by the black horizontal arrow extending across to the black X in the “Defense of
Friends and Allies” mission). Phase 3 of PAA—which adds Aegis ashore, the Block IIA
interceptor, a forward-based TPY-2 or FBX radar, and other capabilities—enhances coverage in
Europe and adds approximately $12 billion in 20-yr costs (see the solid blue arrow extending to
the blue X under the “Defense of Friends and Allies” column). However, Phase 3 of the
European PAA is not designed to defend the U. S. homeland.
In the second set of evolutionary pathways for homeland defense, the current buildout
and sustainment for GMD to complete and maintain the 30 interceptors at FGA and at VAFB are
shown by another solid black line (see black line in the “North American Defense Against North
Korea” mission). The effectiveness of this deployment against North Korean threats is limited,
and it is not given credit for any significant ability in the mission “Homeland Defense Against
Iran and Others” because it is severely limited in defending the eastern United States. At the top
of the current GMD buildout path, the dashed black arrow represents an alternative third site for
existing GMD interceptors in the northeast United States. This alternative provides single-shot
coverage of the eastern United States against threats from the Middle East, with some added
benefit against North Korean threats, indicated by the horizontal dashed black arrow toward the
“North America Defense Against North Korea” column. Because the current GMD is a single-
shot system, it would still be limited in effectiveness. As an alternative with approximately the
same life-cycle costs, Phase 4 of PAA is shown as a blue dashed path to the blue squares. This
alternative is aimed at providing additional early midcourse flight shot opportunities from Poland
against Middle East threats launched at the United States. To be effective in this role, the
Poland-based interceptor would have to have a fly-out velocity greater than 5.5 km/sec.
One of the more important points in Figure 4-6 pertains to Phase 4 of PAA: Specifically,
it is an expensive solution for improving homeland defense yet limited in effectiveness. The
committee’s analysis shows that notional interceptors with a fly-out velocity greater than 4.5
km/sec benefit neither European defense nor other Aegis defense missions. Therefore, Phase 4
of PAA, which is the SM-3 Block IIB higher performance interceptor, has value only for an early
shot opportunity for homeland defense, provided it has sufficient burnout velocity to preclude
being overflown, but comes at a high acquisition and life-cycle cost. An alternative—an evolved
GMD system—provides a more effective homeland defense solution and avoids any need for
Phase 4 of PAA (see violet dotted arrows for GMD-E).
The message of Figure 4-6 should be clear. Specifically, BMD for forward-deployed
forces (i. e., Aegis, PAC-3, THAAD) appears to be on the right track, and the current GMD and
PAA Phase 4 for BMD of the United States are headed on two independent paths that are costly
and, for U. S. homeland defense purposes, of limited effectiveness. For this reason, the
committee recommends an evolved GMD system that provides full shoot-look-shoot (SLS)
capability and is substantially more effective than the other potential homeland defense additions
to the current GMD buildout. While this path has a 10 percent greater LCC because of the cost
of acquiring GBX, it provides robust but still limited defense of the United States and Canada
against threats from any source. It is also decoupled from decisions on the NATO defense
configuration. Moreover, it finesses the issue of large interceptors close to Russian territory.
A detailed discussion of this evolved path for GMD is provided in Chapter 5. In short, the
recommended approach buys more existing supporting sensors and uses them more effectively
than would developing any new sensors.
4-15
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Non-Boost-Phase Systems
The committee’s major recommendations with respect to non-boost-phase systems are as
follows.
Major Recommendation 2: The Missile Defense Agency should reinstitute an aggressive,
balanced midcourse discrimination research and development effort focused on the synergy
between X-band radar data and concurrent interceptor observation while closing on the threat.
Such an R&D effort should have the following attributes among others:
Recognition that discrimination is strongly dependent on BMD system architecture,
and known synergies should be exploited.
A continuing program of test and analysis should be implemented to maintain the
technical capacity that will be needed to support an adequate level of discrimination
as new countermeasures are developed and deployed.
A serious effort to gather and understand data from past and future flight tests and
experiments (including flights of U. S. missiles) from the full range of sensors and to
make full use of the extensive data collected from past experiments to generate robust
discrimination techniques and algorithms.
The committee believes that the effort required for success in this endeavor does not
need to be overlarge but does require that high-quality expertise be brought to bear.
The annual budget outlay, if planned correctly, can be modest compared to current
expenditures.
Major Recommendation 3: The Missile Defense Agency should strengthen its systems
analysis and engineering capability in order to do a better job of assessing system performance
and evaluating new initiatives before significant funding is committed. Cost-benefit analysis
should be central to that capability.
In addition to terminating U. S. boost-phase missile defense systems, MDA should
terminate the PTSS unless a more convincing case can be made for its efficacy for the
mission that it is supposed to carry out.
PTSS provides no information that a combination of the SBIRS and the proposed
suite of X-band radars with the interceptor sensors will not provide better and at
lower cost both initially and over the life cycle. Moreover, as proposed, PTSS
contributes little if anything to midcourse discrimination.
Major Recommendation 4: As a means to defend deployed U. S. forces and allies from short-,
medium-, and intermediate-range ballistic missile threats, the Missile Defense Agency and the
Services should continue investing in non-boost systems such as Aegis, THAAD, and PAC-3,
with continued attention to architecture integration of sensors with shooters (sometimes referred
to as an integrated battle command system, or IBCS), specifically to implement launch-on-
remote (LOR) and engage-on-remote (EOR) firing doctrines.
EOR is essential for effective coverage of Europe from a small number—say, two or
three—of interceptor sites.
Inputs to the IBCS already include those from Defense Support Program (DSP),
SBIRS, and upgraded UHF early warning radars. Maximum use should be made of
these data to relieve X-band radars of unnecessary volume or fan search functions,
permitting them to concentrate radar resources on tracking and discrimination at the
longer ranges permitted when the radars are properly cued to the targets. This
4-16
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
involves little or no new investment. Data latency is a potential problem for the IBCS
that should not be ignored.
Major Recommendation 5: As a means to provide adequate coverage for defense of the U. S.
homeland against likely developments in North Korea and Iran over the next decade or two at an
affordable and efficient 20-yr life-cycle cost, the Missile Defense Agency should implement an
evolutionary approach to the Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system, as
recommended in this report.
Chapter 5 recommends an evolutionary path from the present GMD system to a
system having substantially greater capability and a lower cost than a simple
expansion of the present GMD system. The recommended path builds on existing
developments and technologies working together to make a more effective system.
The concepts are not new and have been well known for at least 40 years. Existing
advances in optical and radar technology will enable its realization.
The evolutionary approach would employ smaller, lower cost, faster burning, two-
stage interceptors building on development work by MDA under the KEI program
carrying heavier but more capable KVs.
The evolutionary approach would employ much longer concurrent threat observation
by both X-band radars and the interceptor KV’s onboard sensor over the entire
engagement. The importance of the synergy between these concurrent observations
and the shoot-look-shoot (SLS) battle space in maximizing midcourse discrimination
effectiveness cannot be overemphasized.
An additional interceptor site with the new evolved GBI in CONUS together with the
recommended radar additions provide SLS coverage of virtually the entire United
States and Canada against the sort of threat that can prudently be expected to emerge
from North Korea or Iran over the coming decade or so. The recommended evolution
would add one additional site in the United States in the northeast, together with
additional X-band radars to more effectively protect the eastern United States and
Canada, particularly against Iranian ICBM threats should they emerge.
This improved capability obviates the need for early intercept from bases in Europe,
unless they are required for European defense.
Defense of Hawaii should be provided by Aegis with launch-on-remote capability:
THAAD would provide a second intercept opportunity as backup for the Aegis
engagement. Hawaii is very small target area for threats from North Korea, Iran, or
any other country and can be covered by one Aegis ship located west of the islands.
By contrast, modifying the GMD system to provide effective defense of Hawaii
against an evolved threat would add substantial complexity and cost.
Maximize the opportunity for observing the threat complex during most of the threat
trajectory until intercept. Addition of stacked TPY-2 radars are recommended for this
purpose.
Make effective use of the high-accuracy data from SBIRS to cue forward X-band
radar and concurrent IR sensors on the interceptor kill vehicle, which together
contribute most of the discrimination capability.
The ability to create, communicate, and interpret target object maps (TOMs) among
the radar, the battle manager, and the interceptor during the entire engagement—
typically hundreds of seconds for a midcourse intercept—increases the probability of
successful discrimination. The resulting TOMs with object rankings should be
exchanged frequently with the interceptor kill vehicle during its fly-out. This
exchange requires taking advantage of the radar’s large aperture and power to close
4-17
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
that communication link over longer distances. The TOM’s data exchange ability
builds on the capabilities demonstrated by programs such as NOE and ERIS and
additionally builds on the MDA Integrated Flight Test Plan for GMD, Aegis, and the
THAAD interceptor that uses sensor elements with the addition of downlinks from
the interceptor to the BMC3 element.
4-18
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
5
Recommended Path Forward
ORGANIZATION
As previously noted, this chapter provides additional details on the recommended
evolution for the Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GMD) system (i. e., the recommended
evolution to GMD, called GMD-E in this chapter), as called for by Major Recommendation 5 in
the Summary and Chapter 4 of this report, “as a means to provide adequate coverage for defense
of the U. S. homeland against likely developments in North Korea and Iran over the next decade
or two at an affordable and efficient 20-yr life cycle cost, the Missile Defense Agency should
implement an evolutionary approach to the GMD system as recommended in this report.”
Before introducing the details of the GMD-E, the basis of Major Recommendation 5 and
the key concepts of operations (CONOPS) for providing an effective defense of the United States
and Canada at lowest cost are discussed.
BASIS FOR MAJOR RECOMMENDATION 5
As part of its congressional tasking, the committee assessed the practicality of boost-
phase defense in comparison to other alternatives, taking into account realistic CONOPS, force
structure, effectiveness, life-cycle cost (LCC), and resilience to countermeasures, among other
things. In doing so, the committee’s analysis led to the following conclusion: The 30 current
ground-based interceptors (GBIs), as part of the GMD system deployed at Fort Greely, Alaska
(FGA), and Vandenberg Air Force Base, California (VAFB), evolved to their current
configuration through a series of decisions and constraints. They provide an early, but fragile,
U. S. homeland defense capability in response primarily to a potential North Korean threat.
Moreover, the current GBIs are very expensive per round when compared to missiles of similar
complexity at the same point in their development and has limited ability to defend the eastern
United States against threats from the Middle East.
Consequently, the committee believes that a properly designed midcourse defense is the
most versatile and cost-effective way to provide a resilient limited defense of the United States.
Specifically, the committee finds as follows:
1. The GMD system lacks fundamental features long known to maximize the
effectiveness of a midcourse hit-to-kill defense capability against even limited threats.
They could, however, readily be incorporated as part of the recommended GMD-E
described in this chapter. The cost effectiveness of various alternatives shown in
Chapter 4 suggests that a substantially lower overall cost could be achieved through
an evolution that is detailed in this chapter.
2. Discriminating between actual warheads and lightweight countermeasures has been a
contentious issue for midcourse defense for more than 40 years (see classified
Appendix J for greater detail). Based on the information presented to it by the
Missile Defense Agency (MDA), the committee learned very little that would help
resolve the discrimination issue in the presence of sophisticated countermeasures. In
fact, the committee had to seek out people who had put together the experiments like
MSX and High-Altitude Observatory 2 (HALO-2) and who had understood and
5-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
analyzed the data gathered. Their funding was terminated several years ago,
ostensibly for budget reasons, and their expertise was lost. When the committee
asked MDA to provide real signature data from all flight tests, MDA did not appear to
know where to find them. MDA showed the committee summaries of results without
the data to support them. It appeared to the committee that MDA has given up trying
and has terminated most of the optical signature analysis of flight data taken over the
last 40 years. In the committee’s view, this is a serious mistake.
3. It is clear that advances in technology for both long-wave infrared sensors and X-
band radars that can coherently integrate and do Doppler imaging are impressive and
offer new opportunities. The fundamental concept for maximizing the effectiveness
is presented below (see classified Appendix J for greater detail).
4. In addition to its long-term cost and performance advantages, the recommended
GMD evolution as provided in the following sections of this chapter, if adopted,
would decouple the defense of North America from decisions and issues related to the
configuration of NATO missile defense, even avoiding altogether the need for PAA.
In short, the recommended GMD-E involves a smaller, shorter burn interceptor
configuration that builds on development work already done by MDA under the Kinetic Energy
Intercept (KEI) program, but with a different front end. The heavier, more capable kill vehicle
(KV) with a larger onboard sensor provides the capabilities absent in the current GMD system
but responsive to the recommended CONOPS, which will be discussed. The GBIs would first be
deployed at a new third site in the northeast United States along with five additional X-band
radars using doubled Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) Army Navy/transportable
radar surveillance (AN/TPY-2) capabilities integrated together at each upgraded early warning
radar (UEWR) site and at Grand Forks, North Dakota. At a later time, the more capable
interceptor would be retrofitted into the silos at Fort Greely, Alaska, with the existing GBIs
diverted to the targets program supporting future operational flight tests.
Much of the basis for the recommended GMD-E has been provided in Chapters 3 and 4.
The committee believes that the recommended GMD-E offers a much more resilient although
limited U. S. homeland defense against any threat at the lowest 20-yr life cycle cost, and that it
can be accomplished within the same requested cumulative 5-yr total obligation authority (TOA)
through FY 2016 as in the current plan. Before providing additional information on the
recommended GMD-E, it is important to consider the key CONOPS for providing an effective
defense of the United States and Canada.
KEY CONOPS FOR EFFECTIVE DEFENSE OF THE
UNITED STATES AND CANADA
Defending high-value assets against attack from ballistic missiles requires minimizing the
possibility of leakage through the defense for any reason while also minimizing the wasting of
interceptors. The contributors to leakage and wastage are discussed in classified Appendix J. In
general, these requirements demand, to the maximum extent possible, a level of robustness that
can overcome or at least minimize the effects of uncertainties in threat knowledge, the failure of
hardware to function as anticipated, or surprises in the adversary’s tactics or capabilities.
Realistic Approach to Maximizing Midcourse Discrimination Effectiveness
While good intelligence provides knowledge of the adversary’s capabilities, it is rarely
perfect, and surprises are to be expected and accommodated. The committee believes that the
key to maximizing the ability to discriminate lethal warheads in the presence of countermeasures
is exploiting the concurrent intermittent viewing by X-band radar and interceptor optics for an
5-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
extended (>100 sec) time as the interceptor closes on the target complex. Yet this has been
ignored in the current GMD system architecture.
The reason for this seems to be a reluctance to commit an interceptor before having high
confidence about the threat complex from some source. Yet, in an attempt to avoid the
midcourse discrimination issue, proponents of boost-phase (or early) intercept are willing to
commit interceptors before even knowing where the threat is going. Surely, then, we should be
willing to commit interceptors after the threat has burned out and its throw weight impact point
has been determined by both space-based infrared system (SBIRS) and forward radars so we
know where to look for the threat and where the threat is going.
An interceptor launched with only that knowledge, its own observation ability, and
enough maneuver ability to cover the remaining uncertainty along with a forward ground-based
X-band radar (GBX) observation provides the most valuable threat discrimination tool as the
interceptor closes on the threat, hunting for the right target. Has it been wasted? Not unless the
adversary expends missiles with no payloads on them. May more interceptors be required?
Perhaps, depending on what is observed by the first one, which serves as a scout and together
with radar observations provides more data than any other source. But this requires getting time
on the side of the defense. It requires maximizing and making efficient use of the battle space,
i. e., it calls for shoot-look-shoot (SLS).
Figure 5-1 illustrates how the synergy of concurrent observations can be exploited. The
high-resolution X-band radar enables Doppler imaging to measure the dynamic behavior of each
object in the threat and to see unique signatures from scattering centers as the objects spin,
tumble, and nutate in response to disturbances due to deployment methods. It also provides
accurate metrics on the position and state vector of each object in the complex and provides all
that information through the battle manager to the interceptor to correlate with its optical
measurements. The interceptor optics also measure the time-varying thermal signature, which
provides information about thermal mass, object dynamics, and the movement of objects in the
threat; this information is transmitted back to the battle management command, control, and
communications (BMC3) for continued use. Together, these observations make
countermeasures more difficult over the total viewing and engagement time. Moreover,
countermeasures that may be effective against the first interceptor will in many cases have
outlived their effectiveness against subsequent interceptors.
Exoatmospheric discrimination by definition requires identifying the threatening reentry
vehicle (RV) from among the cluster of other nonthreatening objects that will be visible to the
defense’s sensors after the end of powered flight. Initially the nonthreatening objects may be
“unintentional”—for example, spent upper stages, deployment or attitude-control modules,
separation debris, debris from unburned fuel, insulation, and other components from the booster.
However, as threat sophistication increases, the defense is likely to have to deal with purposeful
countermeasures—decoys and other penetration aids and tactics to include salvo launches and
antisimulation devices—that adversaries will have deliberately designed to frustrate U. S.
defenses.
Evaluating discrimination effectiveness is an uncertain business. One should avoid
overstating the ease with which countermeasures that are theoretically possible can actually be
made to work in practice, especially against advanced discrimination techniques using multiple
phenomenologies from multiple sensors and exploiting the long observation time that midcourse
intercept makes possible. It is perhaps noteworthy that U. S. (and U. K.) experience with the
development of high-confidence penetration aids during the Cold War was of mixed success. It
would be difficult for an adversary to have confidence in countermeasures without extensive
testing, which the United States might be able to observe and gather data on that would permit
defeating the countermeasures.
5-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-1 Synergy of concurrent radar and KV optical observations. OPIR, other program infrared; TWAA,
tactical warning and attack assessment; IR, infrared.
The art of midcourse discrimination, developed over many decades, does not provide
perfect selection of RVs, but the committee believes that by designing a ballistic missile defense
(BMD) architecture based on the capabilities described below, an adequate level of
discrimination performance can be achieved in the near term, and that this approach has a
reasonable chance of keeping the United States generally ahead in the contest between
countermeasures and counter-countermeasures. This having been said, the reader should
understand that there is no static answer to the question of whether a missile defense can work
against countermeasures. It depends on the resources expended by the offense and the defense
and the knowledge each has of the other’s systems.
While the current GMD may be effective against the near-term threat from North Korea,
the committee disagrees with the statement in the BMDR concluding that this capability can be
maintained “for the foreseeable future.”1 The committee understands this to mean the next
decade or so. If the threat is to be countered for the foreseeable future, the United States needs to
take the steps outlined below to maintain discrimination capability.
The BMD system capabilities that provide reasonable discrimination prospects are mostly
supported by the available hardware and techniques, but they have yet to be included in the
existing or planned GMD architecture. The system capabilities include the following:
1Department of Defense. 2010. Ballistic Missile Defense Review Report, Washington, D. C., February, pp. 9, 15,
and 47.
5-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
1. The threat complex must be observed at frequent intervals by instruments capable of
obtaining discrimination data from the time of booster burnout until intercept occurs
(see Figure 5-1).
2. Observation of the threat is possible and necessary in both microwave and optical
bands, and the resulting data must be fused into a target object map (TOM) to be used
by the interceptors.
3. While other observations can be useful, it is the high-resolution data from X-band
radar and IR seekers such as those on the kill vehicle (KV) that contribute most of the
discrimination capability. Those instruments must be located, tasked, and equipped to
provide these data as soon as practical after booster burnout onward, with minimal
distractions for housekeeping and other duties. Investment in low-resolution
measurements should have lower priority than investments in high-resolution
measurements.
4. The ability to form and interpret TOMs over a time that is typically many hundreds of
seconds for midcourse intercept increases the likelihood of successful discrimination.
The TOMs must therefore be exchanged frequently with the interceptor KVs during
fly-out.
5. Data from the KV’s onboard seeker can be used to improve the discrimination
effectiveness of subsequent intercept attempts and should therefore be downlinked
from the interceptor during flight.
6. To take full advantage of combined radar and KV observations, the BMD system
architectures and firing doctrine should enforce and exploit the maximum battle space
for SLS capabilities.
More generally, the committee believes that a long-term approach to midcourse
countermeasures involves the following:
1. Recognizing that discrimination is not separate from the overall BMD system
architecture and that synergies should be exploited where possible, specifically
through layered defenses such as postboost intercept and shoot-look-shoot (SLS)
tactics.
2. Understanding that the countermeasure threat is not constant and that there is no
permanent solution. A continuing program of test and analysis is necessary to
maintain the technical capacity that will support an adequate level of discrimination
as new countermeasures are developed and deployed.
3. Implementing a more realistic and robust program to gather data from flight tests and
experiments (including on flights of U. S. missiles) from the full range of sensors and
making full use of the extensive data collected from past experiments to continue
developing the applied science from which robust discrimination techniques and
algorithms can be developed.
4. Maintaining an active R&D program on discrimination techniques.
Radar Discrimination
Opponents of BMD systems correctly point out that the system is defective if it lacks the
ability to select threatening targets amongst the many objects that accompany them. This ability
can be enhanced by observation over the longest possible time by X-band radars. Classified
Appendix J discusses issues of radar discrimination, with the conclusion that an adequate
solution of the problem is possible. A generalized summary of those considerations is as
follows.
5-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Bandwidth. X-band radars are used in defense systems to perform precision tracking
and target classification functions. The choice of this band by both U. S. and foreign
radar engineers is based partly on the broad system bandwidth inherent in X-band
operation, which allows transmission of wideband waveforms that resolve and
measure individual objects without interference from others in a target cluster.
Wideband waveforms permit direct measurement of the radial extent of each object
(called range profiling, a standard approach to radar target classification in air and
missile warfare). The radial extent of objects that change their aspect angle by a
significant amount over the observation time—for example, rotating objects or stable
objects viewed from a position outside the plane of the trajectory—provides
measurement in two dimensions.
Cross section. For objects that are resolvable with wideband waveforms, tracking
radars can collect and measure the radar cross section (RCS) of each object within the
target cluster. The absolute RCS is sensitive to details of the object’s size, shape,
surface roughness, and material.
Range Doppler Imaging. Wide-bandwidth echoes from an object, collected over an
extended train of coherent pulses, can be processed to provide a two-dimensional
image of the object, as illustrated in Figure 5-2.2 Such images can be collected
simultaneously on objects in a target cluster while they remain within the beamwidth
of the radar. Some fraction of the objects can be expected to rotate at rates that
permit rapid classification of small or irregular nonthreatening debris. Decoys too
small to present a threat can also be discriminated over periods of several seconds.
The coherent process used in imaging also improves the sensitivity of a radar so that
objects with cross sections smaller than required for acquisition of the track can be
located and their relative positions measured.
Position measurement. With adequate signal-to-noise ratio, a monopulse tracking
radar can limit measurement error to less than 1 percent of its beamwidth. Over
extended track periods, the relative positions can be refined by a further order of
magnitude. Along with measurement of relative range to within fractions of a meter,
using wideband waveforms, these position data provide a three-dimensional target
object map that can be converted to the angular coordinates of a homing seeker,
ensuring proper registration of each object in the target cluster.
Precession and nutation. The range-Doppler image of each object is sensitive to
small angular motions of the object, representing precession and nutation of its axes.3
Observation of these parameters over an extended period provides additional
discriminants that are not available by other means.
Object mass. Objects having insufficient mass to constitute threats can be excluded
as targets for defensive action. To the extent that forward-based X-band radar siting
permits viewing the threat before booster burnout, tracking of the booster through
burnout and deployment of the RV can be useful in this regard.
2Joseph M. Usoff, MIT Lincoln Laboratory. 2007. “Haystack Ultra-wideband Satellite Imaging Radar
(HUSIR),” 2007 IEEE Radar Conf., Boston, Mass., April 17-20, Plenary Session, pp. 17-22, ©IEEE.
3V. V. Chen and H. Ling, Naval Research Laboratory. 2002. Time-Frequency Transforms for Radar Imaging and
Signal Analysis, Artech House, Norwood, Mass.
5-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-2 Example of ISAR satellite imaging from the Haystack radar complex.
Capabilities of other radars. It has been suggested that the Aegis AN/SPY-1 and the
upgraded UHF early warning radars can provide discrimination, or at least
classification, of target objects. These radars have only limited range resolution
capability, far below that of the X-band radars.
The signal bandwidth of the UHF radars is limited to a few megahertz, both by
equipment design and by ionospheric propagation effects. The resulting range resolution is
measured in tens of meters. The beamwidths of the UHF radars are approximately 2 degrees.
The lack of resolution increases the probability that two or more objects will lie in the same
resolution cell, precluding accurate measurements of any sort on the individual objects that
would be useful for discrimination or classification. Widely spaced targets might permit
classification, but the contribution to discrimination and target selection is negligible.
In summary, it is concluded that observation over the longest possible time by X-band
radars is a prerequisite for midcourse discrimination. These radars were designed to perform this
function, and it is essential that they be assigned to perform tracking and discrimination
functions using all their resources, leaving search and warning to the low-resolution radar
systems and overhead sensors that were designed for that purpose. The failure to exploit fully
the ability to extend the synergy between the two sensor classes, which permits extending the
range of the X-band radar tracking and discrimination, has unnecessarily compromised the
performance of the present BMD system.
Finally, although much of the early work on decoy discrimination involved optical
techniques, it appears that with the advent of very capable X-band radars, MDA has shifted away
from this approach over the past decade. While the committee largely agrees with this shift in
emphasis, work on sensors and optical discrimination should be continued because optical
5-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
techniques have not been exploited to their fullest as the committee recommends. Classified
Appendix J provides additional discussion and analysis related to classical optical discrimination.
Fundamental Precepts of a Cost-Effective Ballistic Missile Defense
The following principles should be respected:
1. Understand the threat variables and the adversary’s objectives and design to deny
them;
2. Provide margin and options for unanticipated events or behavior;
3. Make time an ally not an enemy;
4. Keep it as simple as possible;
5. Delegate responsibility for real-time decisions to the proper level rather than
centralize them; and
6. Make the best use of the nature of the assets available and minimize the need for new
ones.
The committee finds the current GMD system deficient with respect to all of these principles.
Functional Delegation
Table 5-1 displays the functions that must be performed in defending against a ballistic
missile attack independent of where it is launched from or where it is going. It indicates what
sensors are needed and what they do and do not provide in the way of information that the
defense can use. In effect, the information in the table helps define the CONOPS and the
architecture. The following discussion amplifies Table 5-1 vis-à-vis the four missile defense
missions discussed throughout this report.
Threat Characterization
The characteristics of threats in the scenarios delineated by the congressional task are
discussed generally in Chapter 1 and in detail in classified Appendix F. In addition, Chapter 2
presented the challenges of the timelines for boost-phase defense. Here, some timelines are
recapped as the committee considers CONOPS for the various missions.
An intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launched from central Iran to the U. S.
East Coast would have a maximum range total flight time of about 40 minutes. If it
were liquid propelled, the boosted portion of that flight time would last about 250 sec,
and if solid propelled, it would last about 180 sec. Similar flight durations would
apply to threats from North Korea. At least some if not all solid-propelled missiles
and all liquid-propelled missiles would have thrust termination capability and could
also use excess energy to loft or depress their trajectory at less than maximum range.
A three-stage, 5,600-km range solid-propelled intermediate-range ballistic missile
(IRBM) capable of targeting London and virtually all of Eurasia from central Iran
would have a maximum range flight time of about 24 min and a boost time about 180
sec. A liquid IRBM with similar capability would have a boost burn time of about
200 sec. Either of these could be lofted or depressed at the expense of range.
In the Middle East or northeast Asia, the defense of allies and/or U. S. forces would
face shorter range threats, with total flight times of 15 min or less and typical
maximum range apogees of 600 km or less. Boost times would probably be no more
than 120 sec with burnout altitudes often less than 100 km. These timelines would
5-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE 5-1 Recommended Missile Defense CONOPS and Function Delegation
Phase of Command Surveillance Combatant Battle Manager Tracking and
Threat Function Level Intelligence Sensors Commander Fire Unit Discrimination
Peacetime Surveillance Approve Monitor Broad area Establish Maintain Maintain readiness
doctrine and developments surveillance ROE for defense
ROE for and assess operations on connectivity
lower levels capabilities, basis of NCA and validate
order of battle, guidance readiness
and intentions
Heightened Alert Increase Estimate Respond to Task Active and Check and verify Prepare to or go
tensions DEFCON intentions and Defcon status surveillance, maintain readiness status active in
level tactics of with focus on assets, alert readiness and designated
adversary adversary AOR defense status of surveillance sector
AOR focus and set defense
contingent resources
ROE
Threat TWAA Delegate Determine Determine raid Determine Select defense Select assets and Concentrate
launch and defense adversary's size, throw priority of resources and maintain resources on
powered authority to remaining assets, weight, impact assets to be plan readiness to fire search and
flight appropriate their locations prediction, defended engagements detection
COCOM and capabilities missile typing. against this
Cue defense attack based
acquisition on ROEs
and tracking
sensors
Threat Defense Monitor Support Maintain Authorize Select firing Prepare Cued or self-cued
midcourse acquisition, NCA/COCOM surveillance for battle doctrine; interceptor(s) search, track and
flight tracking and response and follow- on manager to authorize fire characterization of
engagement contingency attacks from commit unit(s) to engage threat objects
planning planning same or other when forward-
sources based radars
verify threat
Engage and Monitor After forward Establish track
plan 2nd defense radar files and state
shot acquires threat, vectors for all
commit objects
interceptor(s)
Target Implement Prepare backup Rank objects and
designation contingency interceptors transmit
plan handover of
Commit TOM to
additional interceptor
interceptors(s) as
required for other Update TOM
credible objects periodically to
interceptor,
receive sensor
data downlink
and observe
intercept
Post- Response Damage Look at both Commit 2nd shot Maintain track
designation plan assessment interceptor and for any failure on all objects
assessment and response radar TOMs
and radar
designated
target objects
and object
ranking to
determine need
for additional
intercepts
Intercept Monitor Kill assessment
and decision for
2nd shot
Reentry Follow-on Monitor
engagements
Terminal
engagement
within
atmosphere
NOTE: AOR, area of responsibility; ROE, rules of engagement.
5-9
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
also apply to launches from tramp steamers or submarines about 1,000 km off the
coast of the United States or allied homelands. Accordingly, those threats could not
be engaged in boost phase from space but might be engaged in the atmosphere during
boost by forward-based platforms—either airborne or sea-based—if they were close
enough.
Based on public descriptions of the testing carried out by a potential adversary, it is
likely that any threat missile launched would be part of a salvo of near-simultaneous
launches of similar missiles or a variety of missile types. The salvo might be
launched from sites a few kilometers apart and/or widely separated. Missiles of
different types in a salvo might have different missions such as rolling back forward-
based radars and forces as well as strategic targets. Similar missiles in a salvo might
also have different but complementary roles such as an electromagnetic pulse
precursor or defense suppression.
Precursor attacks in particular must be considered a possible element of any threat
raid because they can be implemented by any missile after exit from the atmosphere.
Countermeasures
At some point, countermeasures of various kinds should be expected. While these may
or may not be observed in tests, a reasonable assumption would be that they will be similar to
those tested elsewhere.
Operational Testing in Realistic Engagements Is Costly but Necessary
Confidence in U. S. defense components and their ability to function as expected under
stressing conditions can only be established by end-to-end operational tests that are realistic
albeit limited in scope and number and by continued use of unmodified deployed systems during
the life of the deployment. Of necessity, any one of these tests is expected to be constrained by
cost to one-on-one or few-on few-engagements, but it would certainly possible to inject
realistically simulated data into the surveillance, acquisition, and tracking sensor measurements
and messages to stress the system’s ability to function properly while handling larger raids. In
addition, to serve as a training tool for the operators and to build their knowledge and
confidence, the battle simulation facility could use real system elements in the loop and
introduce failures or unexpected threat behavior.
Defining, developing, manufacturing, and deploying multiple systems to defend against
various often ill-defined potential offensive systems is a significant challenge. In response to
this challenge, MDA, in concert with the DOD Operational Test Assessment Office and the
Services test organizations, has created an overarching Master Integrated Test Plan. A key
concern is the signatures of incoming missiles, reentry vehicles, and associated penetration aids,
which cannot precisely be duplicated or tested. The availability of test missiles also limits the
number of flight tests that could be conducted with the GBIs at FGA and VAFB.
The committee believes that the MDA Master Integrated Test Plan developed and
approved by the Office of Testing and Assessment (OTA), is a reasonable approach to
developing estimates of the initial reliability of the deployed systems while considering the
complexity and costs of any potential test plan. This master plan also takes advantage of
significant simulation testing of all the MDA systems. However, the committee has not seen a
follow-on operational test plan for deployed systems that would provide an ongoing reliability
assessment with associated confidence levels. In short, today’s deployed GBIs do not have
identical configurations, and the missile could have different reliabilities and confidence levels
that would need to be utilized by the war planners. MDA does maintain an accurate
configuration for each deployed GBI, so that the situation of “no two alike” does not now appear
5-10
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
to be an important concern. In summary, MDA’s comprehensive, overarching Master Integrated
Test Plan for all of its deployed assets and supporting activities was distributed in July 2010, but
the actual results and benefits of the plan remain to be seen.
Testing aside, the most important contributor to an effective missile defense is the
robustness of the architecture and the CONOPS that define its capabilities, even given
uncertainties in the threat and reliability of the system elements. For that reason, the committee
believes it is important to specify the CONOPS and the architecture.
Conclusions on CONOPS for Defense of the United States and Canada
The committee draws some conclusions and guidance on CONOPS for defense of the
United States and Canada from Table 5-1 and the analysis in Chapter 2.
1. There is no tenable place from which to launch surface-based or air-launched
interceptors within 1,000 km of central Iran, where that country’s longer-range
missiles are likely to be based for security reasons. Therefore, it would not be
practical to engage any long- or medium-range threats during their boost phase and
they would have to be engaged during their midcourse or terminal trajectories.
Shorter range threats have burn times too short and burnout altitudes too low to
engage before their midcourse or terminal phase of flight.
2. In the view of this committee and based on 50 years of knowledge and experience
with ballistic missiles and defense against them, midcourse defense with a terminal
underlay where needed would be the most cost-effective defense against ballistic
missiles. Among its other benefits, midcourse has time on its side, and this time
should be used wisely.
3. When carefully examined, early intercept is not early enough to avoid the issues of
midcourse discrimination, and it reduces the time available for viewing, which is so
important for midcourse discrimination. Moreover, the schemes recommended to
circumvent that problem are vulnerable to the deployment scheme chosen by the
attacker. However, early intercepts do sometimes offer additional shot opportunities
and might also constrain an adversary’s payload deployment time, making effective
countermeasures potentially more difficult.
4. It should therefore be recognized that no practical defense scheme can avoid the need
for midcourse discrimination. Until that reality is acknowledged, there will be no end
to poorly thought out schemes proposing to avoid the need for midcourse
discrimination.
5. Whether decoys can be readily discriminated, particularly in the face of
antisimulation techniques, remains a contentious subject however. The combination
of observations for more than 100 sec by an interceptor-mounted optical sensor that is
closing on the threat complex, together with concurrent X-band radar observations
and a firing doctrine that exploits the battle space available for SLS engagements,
offers the greatest probability of being able to separate real threatening objects from
decoys and other objects and should be central to any defense of the U. S. homeland,
allies and friends, and U. S. deployed forces.
6. To effectively exploit these capabilities, interceptors must be within sight of a radar—
not necessarily the same one—in order for the radar to communicate with the
interceptor at any time from shortly after launch until intercept. This means that
while tracking the interceptor and target, the radar(s) must be able to transmit in-flight
updates based on radar or battle manager observations and to receive and relay
downlinks from the interceptor once its sensor is uncapped and it sees and decides to
engage. The interceptor then must have the ability to receive communication uplinks
5-11
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
at any time after its first stage burns out (except during staging events) and to send
down to the battle manager, via the radar data on its observation of the threat any time
after sensor uncap, its decisions about ranking and which object it selects to intercept.
7. The observed and processed data transmitted from a midcourse interceptor should
include processed focal plane data as well as all object track files and their ranking
for use by the battle manager for second-shot decisions. It is expected that the focal
plane will be read out at a rate of at least 50 Hz and that the final image messages
should be at a rate of at least 3 Hz within 0.5 sec of intercept. While it is recognized
that this may dictate high bit rates in the last report burst of data, earlier reports can be
at rates no higher than once every 3 to 5 sec until the last 5 to 10 sec before intercept.
This is particularly important for the detection of some countermeasures.
8. Complementing the interceptor capabilities indicated here is a need for enough X-
band radars with sufficient acquisition range and capability to observe, image, and
measure the dynamics of threat objects over as much of their trajectory as practical to
support both discrimination of warheads from other objects and firing solutions and
two-way communication for interceptors even in the presence of countermeasures and
to perform kill assessment for SLS.
9. AN/TPY-2 X-band radars forward-based in Japan and in eastern Turkey or
Azerbaijan, for example, offer a very important capability, particularly for the defense
of allies and deployed U. S. forces, but also for the defense of the United States. Cued
by the Defense Support Program (DSP) or the SBIRS, they provide the earliest
precision tracks that can be propagated forward in time and used for committing
interceptors thousands of kilometers away. They should be appropriately defended
against a rollback attack by short-range, short-time-of-flight ballistic or cruise
missiles as well as against infiltrating ground attack.
10. With capable forward-based radars, it is possible for shorter range engagements,
where time is not an ally, to commit interceptors shortly after threat burnout.
Remaining uncertainties during the interceptor’s boost can be removed by modest
divert maneuvers sacrificing little fly-out velocity.
RECOMMENDED GMD EVOLUTION—THE INTERCEPTOR
Overview
As previously noted, the committee’s analysis shows, among other things, that the GMD
system does not take advantage of fundamental features long known to maximize effectiveness
in a midcourse hit-to-kill defense capability against threats to the U. S. homeland. These features
can still be incorporated at a lower overall cost through the recommended GMD-E described
here.
In short, the recommended evolutionary GMD-E would provide much longer and more
effective concurrent threat observation during engagements by both X-band radars and the
onboard sensors of the KV while closing on the threat complex. This combination, coupled with
SLS battle space and firing doctrine supported by robust two-way communication, is a powerful
tool for discriminating real warheads from countermeasures and for reducing leakage. Precluded
in the current GMD architecture, this combination would also provide a more effective U. S.
homeland defense capability, albeit still a limited one by virtue of the number of interceptors
deployed. Moreover, it would minimize or eliminate the need and cost for so-called early
midcourse engagements from Europe-based large interceptors (greater than 4.5 km/sec fly-out
velocity).
5-12
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The recommended GMD-E—a CONUS-based system—takes advantage of work already
done by MDA, along with previously demonstrated technology and implementations long known
to be effective but unfortunately not considered in the current FGA deployment.
Instead of building more of the current interceptors or in-flight interceptor
communication stations (IFICSs), the evolution would employ a smaller, two-stage interceptor
based on rocket motors developed by the KEI program before it was terminated. It is referred to
in this report as the GMD-E interceptor.
As described in Chapter 2, the KEI program was initiated several years ago to try
(unsuccessfully) to achieve boost-phase intercept with a high-acceleration, high-velocity, two-
stage 60-sec-burn booster (35-sec-burn first stage, 25-sec-burn second stage), plus a two-pulse
third stage, plus a light KV. Careful analysis at the time would have shown that goal to be
impractical for any operationally realistic deployment location, but the booster configuration had
been developed through successful ground firings of each stage when the program was
terminated in 2009.
Ironically, the first-stage rocket motor of the KEI, together with a similar, but less
demanding second stage would be an ideal candidate for the recommended GMD-E interceptor.
Using such technology, one can construct a notional interceptor with a total boosted burn time of
approximately 70 sec. With the elimination of the KEI third stage (note: the first and second
stages now no longer have to propel the mass of the third stage), the recommended GMD-E
interceptor could carry a heavier, more capable KV to greater burnout velocity. Such an
interceptor would be very well suited to the midcourse mission of the recommended GMD-E. It
offers large footprints, and with the features recommended, provides ample battle space to
defend the United States and Canada; it also has resilience to threat uncertainties and a margin
for the growth of payload mass. This notional GMD-E interceptor would have a burnout
velocity of approximately 6 km/sec,
Using the recommended GMD-E interceptor, a third CONUS site would be added in the
northeastern United States, e. g., at Fort Drum, New York, or in northern Maine, to protect the
eastern United States and Canada against any potential threats that are limited in nature. These
changes, along with a recommended new variant of existing X-band radars (discussed below),
provide the important battle space for SLS capability for homeland defense. These changes also
provide the best opportunity for discrimination against offensive countermeasures utilizing the
combination of properly located X-band radar capabilities and optical sensors on the interceptors
themselves as they close on the threat complex.
The recommended GMD-E interceptor is compared to the current GBI and a Standard
Missile (SM)-3 Blocks IIA and IA in Figure 5-3 (see classified Appendix J for greater detail).
Note that the recommended GMD-E external size is identical to that of the KEI.
An additional perspective on the projected capabilities of the recommended GMD-E may
be found from Figure 5-4, which shows the fly-out fan for the recommended GMD-E interceptor
easily reaching out to engage beyond 4,000 km in range down to 100 km altitude for the leading
edge of defended area. The limiting factor on the fly-out envelope is the KV battery, which is
sized for 1,100 sec of operation. As noted to the right of the figure, there is ample payload
margin for an even heavier KV if more divert capability is desired.
5-13
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-3 Comparison of current systems. SOURCE: Extracted from Craig van Schilfgaarde, David Theisen,
Steve Rowland, and Guy Reynard, Northrop Grumman Corporation, “An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for
U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives: Northrop Grumman Perspective,”
presentation to the committee, July 13, 2010. Courtesy of Northrop Grumman Corporation.
FIGURE 5-4 Recommended notional GMD-E interceptor fly-out contours with 6 km/sec interceptor fly-out
contours and two-stage 70-sec total burn.
GMD-E Midcourse Kill Vehicle
As set forth above, the KV for the GMD-E interceptor is more capable and heavier than
the exoatmospheric kill vehicle (EKV) and therefore supports the resilient CONOPS
underpinning a multiple-SLS firing doctrine. It has all the recommended features described in
Chapter 3, including an X- and S-band communication transponder of sufficient transmit power
and antenna configuration for two-way link closure with either X- or S-band radars, radiation-
hardened electronics, and battery capacity for 1,100 sec.
The KV’s long-wavelength infrared (LWIR) sensor can see threat objects at room
temperature at a range of 2,000 km and small, colder objects shortly thereafter as range-to-go
5-14
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
decreases. This longer acquisition range and acuity is achieved with a 30-cm-diameter aperture
and a 256 × 256 two-IR-band focal plane array. A visible band array is also recommended. The
focal plane and adjacent optics are cooled down to about 100 K in flight before sensor uncap
using a gas blow-down system. This provides as much as 200 sec of observation by the onboard
sensor in most first-shot engagements, thus maximizing opportunity for concurrent viewing of
the spatial and temporal dynamics of target objects by both the onboard optical sensor and radars
in view while the interceptor is closing on the target complex. The analysis used to size the
sensor is provided in classified Appendix J.
The KV Divert and Attitude Control System (DACS) is sized for a divert capability of
600 m/sec, which, with the almost-1-degree sensor field of view, can handle handover
uncertainties of ±30 km or more. The large payload margin of the interceptor would allow
additional divert and step staring by the sensor, which in turn would permit even larger handover
uncertainties if desired.
The KV has an encrypted, dual-channel communications transponder with both X- and S-
band two-way encrypted links compatible with either type of radar as the ground transmitter and
receiver. This provides two-way communication with interceptors after end-of-first-stage-
burnout for radar TOM updates or override commands from the battle manager. The encrypted
downlink has enough bandwidth to display what the onboard sensor sees and designates from
sensor uncap to intercept.
A notional inboard profile of the recommended GMD-E KV is shown in Figure 5-5, and
a weight statement is shown in Table 5-2.
Figure 5-6 displays the sensor and KV fully fueled (“wet”) mass as a function of cooled
sensor aperture, given the performance and characteristics shown in Table 5-2. Note that the
GMD-E kill vehicle fits nicely on that curve, albeit with less functionality included. A feature
known as a “kill enhancement device” is incorporated into the recommended KV. The basic
concept is to increase the cross section of the KV around the seeker with a lightweight array to
handle very closely spaced objects. The Exoatmospheric Re-entry Interceptor Subsystem (ERIS)
KV flown in 1991 had such an array. It employed a lightweight, inflatable tubular frame, which
supported a thin membrane that was deployed several seconds before intercept on the basis of
estimated time-to-go. While ERIS achieved direct body-to-body impact and also demonstrated
the ability to select the aim point, the kill enhancement device provided a hedge against some
countermeasures. The ERIS KKV, with its lethality enhancement device deployed, is shown in
Figure 5-7.
5-15
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-5 KKV notional configuration. Gray denotes Kevlar/epoxy frame. SOURCE: David K. Barton, Roger
Falcone, Daniel Kleppner, Frederick K. Lamb, Ming K. Lau, Harvey L. Lynch, David Moncton, et al. 2004. Report
of the American Physical Society Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense:
Scientific and Technical Issues, American Physical Society, College Park, Md., October 5, p. S250.
FIGURE 5-6 GMD-E midcourse KV and sensor mass as a function of aperture diameter.
5-16
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE 5-2 Recommended notional GMD-E KV Mass Properties Statement
Liquid Midcourse KV with 30 cm 45-kg Sensor Mass
Segment or Subassembly ( kg ) Notes
DACS Adjusted for 4 g
Pressure regulator 0. 50 Assumes 4 divert thrusters
Divert thrusters 4. 60 ACS required assumed = 0. 1 × divert
ACS thrusters 0. 46 Closing velocity = 8-10 km/sec
Value drivers Included Maximum total time of KV operational
Manifold Included = 1, 100 sec
Sized for 4 g in last 10 sec
Seeker less IMU including cooling 45. 00
Contingency for FPA shielding 1. 00
IMU 1. 00
Avionicsa
Separation system 0. 50
Ordnance initiate lines 0. 25
Kill enhancement device 5. 00 Rough estimate
KV primary battery 5. 00 Estimate based on other programs
KV basic structure and install 8. 00 Tanks used as load-carrying structure
but Kevlar Epoxy composite structure
for high axial and lateral acceleration
Total KV dry weight less tank 81. 31 Total ∆V in m/sec + 10 % ACS
Useful fuel and oxidizer 19. 30 Added ACS fuel at 10 % of divert
ACS and press fraction of useful, 10 %
ACS and pressurization fuel, 10 % 1. 93 Propellant trapped in system 20 % of
Unusable propellant fraction, 3 % fuel load
Unusable propellant 0. 58 Conventiional pressure tanks
Tankage 3. 98 Account for ACS/pressure fuel used but
Subtotal of KV wet 106. 52 not effective for thrust
I of propellant ( sec ) 300 sp
I ( effective ) after ACS and pressurization fuel 285 sp
∆V from rocket equation 602
∆V desired in m/sec ( input ) 600
KV mass with 15 % fuel remaining 88. 47
Thrust for 4 g at 15 % fuel load 3, 468 Based on 4 g
g at full fuel load 3. 32
NOTE: ACS, altitude control system; IMU, inertial measurement unit; FPA, focal plan array; FTS, flight
termination system; TM, telemetry.
a Avionics includes guidance/control computer, tactical communications transponder, KV electronic safe arm, FTS
antenna ( nontactical ), FTS battery, command destruction recovery signal, X-band antennas, X-band TM, power
divider/hybrid coupler, J Box, control module, logic.
5-17
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-7 Exoatmospheric Re-entry Interceptor Subsystem (ERIS) KKV configuration showing enhancement
device concept in the deployed position. SOURCE: David K. Barton, Roger Falcone, Daniel Kleppner, Frederick
K. Lamb, Ming K. Lau, Harvey L. Lynch, David Moncton, et al. 2004. Report of the American Physical Society
Study Group on Boost-Phase Intercept Systems for National Missile Defense: Scientific and Technical Issues,
American Physical Society, College Park, Md., October 5, p. S207.
RECOMMENDED GMD EVOLUTION—THE SENSORS
Layered defense systems are desirable to increase engagement effectiveness, but
individual layers should be implemented only if the value added is better and more cost effective
than competing options. Layered defense is commonly thought of as independent multilayers of
distinctly different elements that make up the individual layers. However, it is more useful to
think of layered defense as multiple SLS engagement opportunities over a large portion of an
ICBM threat trajectory.4 This should include multiple layers of sensors that support the
engagements of the interceptors. Many of these multiple layers of sensors may be in the same
configuration, but they may be based in different geographical areas to provide coverage and
engagement flexibility to engage ICBM threats over a wide range of approach azimuths.
The threat detection, tracking, and imaging sensor suite is a key element of any missile
defense system, as described earlier in the recommended concept of operations. Early threat
detection and track with sufficient accuracy to provide targeting of long-reach defensive missiles
is essential for engagements with a high probability of success. The sensor suite includes the
sensors on the interceptor as well as active and passive off-board sensors with a diversity of
basing. Owing to the size and power requirements, most of the active long-range radars will
have to be land- or sea-based. The passive sensor suite is made up of infrared sensors operating
in the short-range infrared (SWIR) to LWIR wave bands, which can be deployed on airborne,
missile-borne, or satellite platforms. The deployment configuration should provide early threat
detection and track from multiple sensor sources—preferably combinations of active and
4SLS can include both shoot and look at the intercept before firing again and an equally valuable case of looking
at what the first interceptor sees and designates to home on and dispatching another interceptor if there appears to be
more than one credible object ranked.
5-18
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
passive—with capability for continuous coverage over large segments of the threat trajectory.
The system sensor suite should be configured to avoid single-point sensor failure that would
disable the system. Such failure would include mechanical failure and downtime for repairs and
maintenance as well as failures due to various natural phenomena such as weather, storms, solar
activity, and ionospheric perturbations. It would also include covert and overt actions by
adversaries. Redundancy of sensors is another form of layering. If the sensors are chosen
judiciously, this can be done at a reasonable cost.
GMD-E Radars
The recommended GMD-E deployment takes advantage of the space-based SBIRS and
DSP satellite systems, as well as currently planned forward-based AN/TPY-2 radars, referred to
as standalone X-band radar (FBX), located in Japan and at one or more locations north of Iran.
In addition, the recommended GMD-E provides a significant enhancement in land-based
radars through the introduction of a recommended doubling of existing AN/TPY-2 radars, one
stacked on top of the other. These doubled (or stacked) radars would be mounted on azimuth
turntables (like the sea-based X-band radar (SBX)) that could be mechanically reoriented (not
scanned) through an azimuth sector of 270 degrees. For the purposes of this report, the
recommended doubled AN/TPY-2 radars are designated GBX radars.
More specifically, the recommended GBX radars would provide electronic scan coverage
from the horizon to the zenith over a traverse angle sector of 45 degrees from broadside. The
traverse is a great circle angle passing through the broadside azimuth at the elevation of the
scanned beam it covers: For example, 45 degree azimuth at the horizon, 93 degree azimuth at
45 degree elevation, and all azimuths at zenith.
The output of this “doubled,” over-and-under, dual-array GBX system would be
combined coherently through a time-delay device that permits the full instantaneous signal
bandwidth to be used for range Doppler imaging. The coherent combination produces an
elevation beam width half that of the AN/TPY-2 radar, with twice the gain (four times the two-
way gain) and twice the peak and average power. Duplicate power supply and cooling units
would be required, but a single electronic equipment unit should suffice, with minimal added
electronics to handle the combined signals.
It is recommended that these stacked GBX radars be located at the current UEWR
(ballistic missile early warning system (BMEWS)) sites (Cape Cod, Massachusetts; Grand Forks,
North Dakota; Thule, Greenland; and Fylingdales, United Kingdom). Additionally, as a result of
its analysis, the committee recommends that a fifth GBX radar be added at Clear, Alaska, and
that the SBX be moved permanently to Adak, Alaska.
Figure 5-8 shows the GBX architecture for homeland defense that was used for the
analysis to support a multiple SLS firing doctrine: This architecture greatly increases system
engagement effectiveness. Note in Figure 5-8 that the field of regard for the AN/TPY-2 radars is
shown symbolically as 360 degrees. In fact, a rotational mounting would be needed to
accomplish this 360-degree capability.
5-19
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-8 Recommended notional GMD-E radar architecture for homeland defense.
Scheduling of X-Band Radar for Multiple Engagements
The range at which acquisition and tracking of a target complex is possible can be
increased when accurate cueing from external sensors permits the X-band radars to be pointed at
the target without use of an acquisition scan. This allows the integration of multiple pulses.
Without regard to the transmitted waveform, the time required to exchange a pulse with a target
at 1,000 km range is equal to twice the range divided by the velocity of light, which is 7 ms,
plus an allowance for reception of the entire echo, totaling 8 msec. For example, if integration
of 10 pulses for acquisition and tracking were necessary, a beam dwell of approximately 80 msec
at 1,000-km target range, or 160 msec at 2,000-km target range would be required. Accurate
velocity measurement and range-Doppler imaging would typically require a sequence of these
10-pulse dwells over a period of approximately10 sec (for example, 4 dwells at 2.5 sec intervals).
Thus, each target would consume a nominal 320 – 640 msec in 10 sec, or 3.2 – 6.4 percent of the
radar’s time.
An uplink/downlink function should be included as a new radar mode. Assuming that the
transmitter and receiver could be modified to pass the required information, this function is
estimated to require 0.65 percent of the radar resources per interceptor for an in-flight target
update (IFTU) every 10 sec, until the final 10sec before intercept, where 65 percent might be
required for IFTUs every 0.1 sec (classified Appendix J provides greater detail). In the unlikely
event that two or more interceptors intercept within 10 sec of each other, they would have to
share the resources and accept less frequent IFTUs.
5-20
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Therefore, combined tracking and IFTU activity in the example above would
requireapproximately 4-7 percent of the radar resources per target until 10 sec before intercept,
corresponding to a radar system that could handle approximately 14-26 simultaneous targets,
depending on their distance from the radar. The resource allocation is roughly proportional to
the average target range.
The kill assessment function requires minimal radar resources, as it serves merely to
detect the fragmentation of the selected target by the interceptor. If the prior discrimination has
ruled out the presence of additional lethal targets, fragmentation of the selected target is
confirmation of kill.
The very-long-range sea-based X-band radar (SBX) currently being used as a test asset
would provide Pacific coverage based in Adak, Alaska, where moorings for it currently exist. It
is shown with 360-degree coverage because it is turntable mounted, but its array has a limited
field of view. Additionally, two medium-range AN/TPY-2 class X-band radars deployed in
Japan and southeastern Europe (eastern Turkey) provide the precision tracking capability and kill
assessment to enable SLS with the concurrent viewing that the committee described earlier.
These radars, coupled with the recommended GMD-E interceptors, provide SLS engagement
battle space over virtually all populated portions of North America for the midcourse phase of
the ICBM threat trajectory—i. e., they provide homeland defense.
Details of the analysis (a homeland defense-oriented analysis process) utilizing radars
and radar deployment presented above are presented in the next section.
RESULTS OF ENGAGEMENT ANALYSIS AND SIMULATION
OF THE SYSTEM IN DEFENDING THE HOMELAND
Overview
This section summarizes the results of detailed engagement analyses used to assess the
effectiveness of the recommended GMD-E for the missions for homeland defense against any
limited attack: Iranian and North Korean threats were used as cases for analysis. In each case
provided below, interceptor basing was assumed at FGA, and at a northeast CONUS location,
e. g., Fort Drum, New York; Caribou, Maine; or Rome, New York. An additional trial location at
Grand Forks, North Dakota, was also evaluated but found redundant and unnecessary.
Coverage of GMD Evolution Against Threats from Iran
The following section considers threats from Iran and compares single-shot and SLS
coverage for minimum-energy, lofted, and depressed trajectories.
Figure 5-9 shows the maximum footprint where only one shot is possible in blue using
the committee’s proposed architecture for homeland defense. It also shows the footprint for at
least one SLS cycle in red.5 Interceptors are assumed to be launched 10 sec after entering an X-
band radar’s track capability and must be observed by X-band radars for at least 50 sec.
Here, the Alaska site and the northeast site provide full coverage of the United States and
Canada for at least one shot, and there is SLS capability over all populated areas of North
America. In addition, in the area between the single-shot footprint and the SLS footprint, there is
battle space for second shots to replace failures or to engage additional credible objects identified
by the first interceptor at the time it designates its intended target object. This feature is
sometimes called shoot-evaluate-shoot or shoot-designate-shoot. The bottoms of the footprints
are left open because they depend on the threat missile maximum range assumed. Because the
footprints are the union of overlapping coverages from FGA, and, in these examples, from Fort
5Figures 5-8 to 5-14 were generated from the committee’s analysis using Google Earth. ©2011 Google, Map
Data©2011 Tele Atlas.
5-21
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-9 Notional single-shot and SLS footprints against minimum energy ICBM trajectories from Iran.
Drum, New York, the overlapping boundaries of each site are shown in the same color, but
dotted.
At anything less than maximum range, the threat could use the excess energy to fly a
lofted or depressed trajectory if such a trajectory offered any advantage. The next two figures
show single-shot and SLS footprints for coverage against those tactics.
Figure 5-10 again shows complete coverage of North America on a single-shot basis,
with the red footprint showing that all populated areas are within the SLS footprint. Depressed
trajectories drive the leading edge of the footprint coverage back, as shown in Figure 5-11. The
time constraints, and the fact that the forward radars see less of the trajectory or are underflown
completely, significantly reduce the coverage for a guaranteed SLS footprint; even here,
however, the single-shot coverage is complete except for the North Slope of Alaska.
The main message of the figures and the associated assessment is as follows: If the
recommended CONUS-based GMD-E interceptor is adopted, there is no need for early intercepts
from Europe to help defend North America, because the CONUS-based interceptors provide
excellent coverage with at least one SLS engagement and often a third shot as well.
Early Intercept: Useful or Not?
In view of the above message regarding early intercepts vis-à-vis the recommended
GMD-E, some additional discussion of early intercepts is useful. In general, the value of early
intercept depends on the fragility or robustness of the CONUS deployment of GMD, including
the recommended GMD-E. The contribution of early intercepts using the GMD-E interceptor in
Europe and the western Pacific was studied as part of the committee’s analysis, and examples are
shown later in this chapter and in more detail in classified Appendix J. However, at the present
point, some general observations may be made.
5-22
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-10 Notional defense footprints: Iran lofted trajectories.
FIGURE 5-11 Notional defense footprints: Iran depressed trajectory.
In reviewing Figure 5-11, it can be seen that there is only single-shot coverage of the
Canadian Maritimes and Newfoundland. Figure 5-12 shows how the coverage changes with a
4.5 km/sec interceptor at the Polish site; this extension of the red SLS boundary is shown in
yellow. While that interceptor can be overflown by modest lofting, it provides an additional
early shot against minimum-energy or depressed threats from Iran to the East Coast of North
5-23
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-12 Notional coverage against depressed threats (notional 4.5 km/sec interceptor at the Polish site).
America that would otherwise be defended only by single-shot coverage. The same increase in
coverage would result against minimum-energy threats toward northeast Canada. The other
potential advantage of early intercept is to force an adversary to deploy missile payloads more
quickly, which may complicate its ability to deploy effective countermeasures. However, as
shown in some of the engagements analyzed in this chapter, early intercept even in the best of
cases does not occur early enough to avoid the need for midcourse discrimination.
While intercept from Europe would be quite important if nothing is done about the
limitations of the current GMD system architecture, the committee believes it is better to solve
that problem, and others, with the recommended CONUS-based GMD-E. It notes that a 4-
km/sec interceptor based in either Romania or northern Poland does not have sufficient reach to
engage threats headed to the United States from Iran. While the introduction of the GMD
Evolved Interceptor into Poland in a later phase of the adaptive deployment would avoid the cost
of yet another interceptor development, it would clearly exacerbate political tensions in the
region: It would be able to intercept Russian ICBMs deployed in the southwesternmost Russian
bases heading toward targets in the eastern United States. The added shot opportunities provided
by introducing a Poland-based GMD-E interceptor are shown later in this chapter. A 4.5-km/sec
interceptor cannot threaten any Russian strategic deterrent. While a 6-km/sec interceptor in
Europe would provide additional shot opportunities for CONUS defense, the committee does not
advocate introducing an interceptor with fly-out velocity greater than about 4.5 km/sec into
Europe.
Coverage of GMD Evolution Against Threats from North Korea
In a format similar to that of the figures showing the threat from Iran, Figures 5-13, 5-14,
and 5-15 compare nominal single-shot and SLS coverage for minimum energy, lofted, and
depressed trajectories from North Korea for the committee’s recommended architecture. These
threats are seen before burnout by the Shariki FBX, then by the SBX at Adak, Alaska, and
finally, in some cases, by the GBX at Clear, Alaska.
5-24
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-13 Notional defended footprint of North Korean minimum energy trajectories.
FIGURE 5-14 Notional defended footprint of North Korean lofted trajectories.
5-25
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-15 Notional defended footprint of North Korean depressed trajectories.
Figure 5-12 shows the notional single-shot footprint in blue against minimum-energy
threats from North Korea. In these cases, threats are first tracked by the Shariki FBX for over
100 sec and then by the SBX at Adak, Alaska, and in some cases by the GBX at Clear, Alaska.
The coverage afforded by lofted trajectories from North Korea is shown in Figure 5-14. The two
sites easily provide SLS coverage of all of North America against lofted threats from North
Korea. Figure 5-15 shows the coverage against North Korean depressed trajectories. Here,
while most of northwest Canada is protected, but the coverage of Alaska is reduced by the short
time of flight and the shallow trajectories, making defense of the FGA site less robust than might
be desired.
It should be noted, however, the committee’s analysis shows that notional interceptors
with a fly-out velocity of 4.3-4.5 km/sec that are ship-based in the northern Sea of Japan with
engage-on-remote capability from the Shariki FBX would be capable of an additional early shot
for North Korean threats to Alaska.
Layered Interceptors
Layered sensors with the ability to provide almost continuous ICBM target track from
launch to near impact give rise to layered deployment interceptors. Using the sensor
configuration discussed above, a hypothetical interceptor basing concept is added to examine the
propects of developing a layered missile defense system capable of SLS engagements in all
phases of the ICBM trajectory, from early ascent to near apogee and beyond apogee to near the
bottom of the battle space at reentry. An important attribute of a layered system of this type
includes a provision for downlinking the data from the interceptor sensor as it closes on the
target. The in-flight interceptor communication concept is presented in classified Appendix J.
This then gives the interceptor a dual role as another layer in the sensor suite, with the most
accurate and current data available for use by successive interceptors in the SLS sequence.
5-26
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Interceptor Site Additions Considered
In addition to FGA and VAFB, new sites, including a northeastern United States site such
as Fort Drum, New York, or northern Maine; a far western site on Shemya, Alaska; and a
European site in Poland, were studied. All of these new interceptor sites were assumed to be
populated with the new GMD-E high-performance interceptors, as previously described, with
communication links to the BMC2 system. In this regard, the first step in a deployment
evolution (using GMD-E interceptors) would be a committee-recommended site for 30
interceptors in upstate New York or northern New England. The next step in the evolution
would be a phased upgrade of the current interceptors at FGA and VAFB, with the new GMD-E
interceptors. In addition, an Aegis system would be used to defend Hawaii (either a ship
positioned near Kauai, Hawaii, or Aegis ashore on Kauai with an additional GBX radar and
THAAD battery for second shot).
Figures 5-16 and 5-17 and Table 5-3 present hypothetical ICBM threat engagements for
scenarios between a Middle East launch point and the East Coast and middle of CONUS. This
information is provided as an example of the level of analytical detail that was incorporated
within the study process. Similar data are provided in classified Appendix J for a northeast Asia
launch point aimed toward Hawaii, the West Coast, or the middle of CONUS.
This hypothetical ICBM engagement assessment illustrates a firing doctrine using SLS
engagements. Additionally, the trajectories in the figures that follow and in classified Appendix
J are color-coded to reflect the portions of the trajectories that are being tracked by the various
radars. If more than one radar is capable of tracking the threat, the trajectory ground track will
have intermittent colors that correspond to the radars involved. The initial red segments of the
threat trajectories indicate the booster burn phase that is being tracked by IR satellite sensors.
Segments that are shown in black indicate no sensor track. Likewise, the red segments of the
interceptor trajectory represent the boost phase at launch and the homing phase that begins at KV
sensor acquisition of the threat complex.
From the hypothetical engagement examples provided below, the engagement battle
space flexibility available in this layered concept is shown to be significant to a wide range of
threats and countermeasures that are mission-timeline-sensitive in design; it also provides for
greater flexibility to overcome early engagement component failures of our system (e. g., radar
outages).
This analysis represents a reasonably thorough conceptual analysis of hypothetical threats
and is by no means optimized to achieve a good balance among the sensor and interceptor
elements. Such a balance would require a much more rigorous and broader-ranging assessment
of parametric technical requirements and an evaluation of system design. However, the
committee believes the analysis presented below can point the way to a layered missile defense
concept that will be very effective and highly responsive to the changing strategic environment
and to the uncertainties surrounding who our adversary might one day be.
Middle East Threat to CONUS East Coast
Figures 5-16 and 5-17 show two different views (a ground track view and a three-
dimensional view) of a hypothetical East Coast engagement with at least two SLS opportunities
from CONUS-based interceptors, with the first engagement just after apogee. If the same
interceptor type were also based in Poland, two additional ascent shots would be possible. Table
5-3 displays an event timeline for this case.
5-27
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-16 Example of Middle East to U. S. East Coast four-shot SLS engagement (ground track view).
FIGURE 5-17 Example of Middle East to U. S. East Coast four-shot SLS engagement (three-dimensional view).
5-28
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE 5-3 Typical Mission Timeline
Mission Timeline
(sec) Mission Event Sequence
0 Threat launch
30 Initgial DSP report
125 Begin track Azerbaijan XBR (R = 872km; elev = 2.2 deg)
180 Threat booster burnout
190 First shot interceptor launched from Poland site (commiy on track from Azerbaijan XBR)
260 Interceptor burnout
339 KV sensor acquires threat complex (R2Tgt =1,994 km; TGo = 177 sec; R2Int = 1,061 km
349 Initial course correction divert (R2Tgt = 1,883 km; T2Go = 167 sec; R2Int = 999 km
516 First shot intercept opportunity (Alt = 836 km; R = 1,462 km; ITOF = 326 sec; closing vel 11.3
km/sec; Xang = 36 deg)
Second shot (SLS) interceptor launched from Poland site (commit on Fylingdales GBX track +
TOM from previous KV sensor
Interceptor burnout
KV sensor acquires threat complex (R2Tgt = 1,000 km; T2Go = 116 sec; RInt = 692 km)
Initial optional course correction divert (R2Tgt = 915 km; T2Go = 106 sec; R2Int = 636 km)
Second shot intercept opportunity (Alt = 1,111 km; FO R = 302 km; ITOF = 196 sec; closing
vel = 8.6 km/sec; Xang = deg)
Kill (hit) assessment by Fylingdales GBX (R = 2,780 km; elev = 6.3 deg)
526 Second shot (SLS) interceptor launched from Poland site (commit on Fylingdales GBX track +
TOM from previous KV sensor
616 Interceptor burnout
626 KV sensor acquires threat complex (R2Tgt = 1,000 km; T2Go = 116 sec; RInt = 692 km)
636 Initial optional course correction divert (R2Tgt = 915 km; T2Go = 106 sec; R2Int = 636 km)
742 Second shot intercept opportunity (Alt = 1,111 km; FO R = 302 km; ITOF = 196 sec; closing
vel = 8.6 km/sec; Xang = deg)
752 Kill (hit) assessment by Fylingdales GBX (R = 2,780 km; elev = 6.3 deg)
772 Third shoht (SLS) interceptor launched from Caribou (commit on Fylingdales GBX track +
TOM from previous KV sensor
842 Interceptor burnout
1,081 Threat reaches its trajectory apogee
1,201 KV sensor acquires threat complex (R2Tgt = 1,992 km; T2Go = 180 sec; R2Int = 985 km
1,211 Initial optional course correction divert (R2Tgt =,882 km; T2Go = 170 sec; R2Int = 929 km)
1,381 Third shot intercept opportunity (Alt = 1,144 km; R = 2,770 km; ITOF = 609 sec; closing vel =
11.1 km/sec; Xang = 8.4 deg)
1,391 Kill (hit) assessment by Fylingdales (R = 2,382 km; elev =nm19/4 deg)
1,411 Fourth shot (SLS) interceptor launched from Carib ou (commit on Fylingdales GBX track +
TOM from previous KV sensor
1,481 Intercept burnout
1,515 KV sensor acquires threat complex (R2Tgt = 1,998 km; T2Go = 167 sec; R2Int = 1,031 km)
1,525 Initial optional course correct divert (R2Tgt = 1,879; T2Go = 157 sec; R2Int =m,967 km)
1,682 Fourth shot intercept opportunity (Alt = 780 km; FO R = 1,174 km; ITOF = 271 sec; closing vel
= 12 km/sec; Xang = 16 deg)
1,692 Kill (hit) assessment by Cape Cod GBX (R = 1,870 km; elev = 16.6 deg)
Battle space remaining = 319 sec
2,021 Threat reaches minimum intercept altitude if not intercepted
2,050 Threat reaches target if not intercepted
NOTE: Hypothetical Middle East to East Coast CONUS four-shot SLS scenario. R, range.
Figure 5-16 displays the intercept event times for each shot in the four-shot SLS sequence
and the apogee point looking down along the ground track of the threat trajectory. In this
example the first two shots are taken from the Poland interceptor site prior to apogee. The first
shot, if it misses or sees more than one credible object, can be considered as a pathfinder for the
5-29
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
second shot in the SLS firing doctrine. Likewise, this discrimination data stream cascades
downward to each succeeding shot in the SLS sequence. The continuous ground-based radar
(GBR) track and hit/kill assessment data along with data from the earlier interceptor sensor TOM
are fused by the BMC2 and provided to each interceptor in the SLS succession until a kill is
assessed as complete or until the battle space is exhausted. The last two shots, if needed, come
from a CONUS East Coast interceptor site, in this example at Caribou, Maine.
Figure 5-17 displays the same engagement using a three-dimensional projection to give
an altitude perspective along with additional data indicating the geometry between the line-of-
sight (LOS) at the KV sensor acquisition of the target complex and the time to go (T2Go) to
intercept of the target. The interceptor total time of flight (ITOF) from launch to intercept of the
target is also shown. The divergent blue line is the LOS to the target, and the red line is the path
of the interceptor KV to the target. The angle at which the KV trajectory (red) approaches the
target trajectory (yellow) gives an indication of the crossing angle between the KV and target.
Crossing angles of less than 90 degrees result in head-on intercepts, and crossing angles greater
than 90 degrees are referred to as tail-chase intercepts. Head-on intercepts are preferred due to
their higher closing velocity, which results in much greater energy exchange between the
colliding bodies and therefore a much more lethal engagement.
Table 5-3 presents a more detailed timeline and provides metrics for an engagement such
as this. It can be seen from an examination of the event timeline that a significant battle space is
left after the fourth shot in the SLS engagement sequence. This provides a lot of flexibility in the
timing of the actual shots and allows more time for certain functions that might be impacted by
natural backgrounds and unexpected events during the course of the engagement. For example,
when the first interceptor first acquires the threat complex at 339 sec and tracks long enough to
determine that there is more than one credible object in the threat, this TOM information can be
transmitted back to the BMC2 and an additional interceptor(s) can be launched before the first
interceptor to make its intercept. This strategy is referred to as shoot-engage-shoot (SES) and
can make use of the approximately 150-160 sec of battle space available before the first
interceptor reaches its intercept point. Likewise, if the first interceptor should fail at any point in
its flight, and this information is available to the BMC2, it can be replaced immediately by
another interceptor using a strategy referred to as shoot-fail-shoot (SFS).
Effect of Time Delays Between Planned SLS Engagements
If the second shot is taken at its normal planned time, based on SLS, it would be launched
at 546 sec and would intercept at 742 sec in the mission timeline. This assumes a 30-sec time
delay for XBR tracking and kill assessment between the first intercept and launch of the second
interceptor. Kill assessment is based on real-time analysis of X-band radar track and debris data
to determine if a credible threat on a continuing ballistic path survived and should be engaged. It
is noted that the closing velocity for the second intercept is about 8.6 km/sec and the crossing
angle is about 81 degrees, with a total time of flight from launch to intercept of 196 sec at a fly-
out ground range of only 302 km. Additional analysis shows the second interceptor launch could
be delayed by as much as 2 min (120 sec), at 666 sec in the timeline, and still engage the target
with a closing velocity of about 4.8 km/sec and a crossing angle of 127 degrees (a tail-chase
geometry) at 931 sec in the mission timeline compared to the 742 sec in the normal sequence.
When analysis is taken to the kinematic limit of being able to engage with the second shot, it
shows the maximum additional delay between the first intercept and launch of the second
interceptor is 3 min (180 sec), resulting in a second interceptor launch at 726 sec and an intercept
at 1,353 sec. This results in a closing velocity of only 1.7 km/sec and a crossing angle of 165
degrees (a severe tail chase) and may not have enough closing velocity to effect a lethal collision
with the target.
5-30
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Interceptor SFS Replacement in Each Layer
The timeline that results if this additional 120-sec interceptor launch delay is flowed
down to each layer of the four-shot SLS sequence can be compared with the timeline of
Table 5-3.
Launch Intercept Closing Velocity Crossing Angle
Sequence (sec) (sec) (km/sec) (deg)
First shot 190 516 11.3 35.7
Second shot 666 931 4.8 127.0
Third shot 1,081 1,525 11.5 10.3
Fourth shot 1,675 1,811 12.2 34.2
Figure 5-18 displays the ground track view of the baseline engagement (same as Figure
5-16) and compares it with the case of 120-sec additional time delays between intercept and
launch of each remaining interceptor in the four-shot SLS sequence. In short, if the second
interceptor is launched in a normal SLS sequence and there is a failure during boost phase or
even a KV sensor failure at target acquisition, at 626 sec into the mission timeline, there is still
ample time to launch a replacement interceptor in an SFS mode and not eliminate the
downstream opportunities for the third and fourth shots in a continuation of the SLS sequence.
In fact, were this same kind of interceptor failure to occur at each layer in the four-shot sequence
there still would be enough battle space in each layer for an SFS replacement, as shown in the
bottom part of Figure 5-18.
5-31
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-18 Example of Middle East to CONUS East Coast four-shot SLS engamement scenario (ground track
view).
Effect of Individual and Multiple Radar Outages on SLS Performance
The issue of radar outage is a likely source of single-point failure in a missile defense
system. However, with proper layering of critical radars, the concept is very resilient to the loss
of one, two, and even three radars. Using an approach similar to that in the interceptor failure
example, the result of losing one, two, or three of the four X-band radars at play in this
scenario—Azerbaijan TPY-2 (XBR); Fylingdales, U. K. (GBX); Thule, Greenland (GBX); and
Cape Cod, Massachusetts (GBX). The Azerbaijan TPY-2 FBX could just as well have been
placed in eastern Turkey for the purposes of this analysis.
5-32
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Single Radar Out
Case 1, Figure 5-19. Azerbaijan out (earliest first-shot commit): Fylingdales GBX
fills this role with the following result (can still get four shots, one from Poland and
three from Maine):
Launch Intercept Closing Velocity Crossing Angle
Sequence Site (sec) (sec) (km/sec) (deg)
First shot Poland 474 690 9.5 67.4
Second shot Poland Not enough battle space for second shot Poland site
Second shot Maine 720 1,357 11.1 8.3
Third shot Maine 1,387 1,671 11.9 15.3
Fourth shot Maine 1,701 1,825 12.1 39
FIGURE 5-19 Case 1: Azerbaijan radar out.
Case 2, Figure 5-20 (two possibilities). Fylingdales out (first-shot kill assessment
and second- and third-shot commit).
—Thule GBX fills the third-shot commit role with the following result:
Launch Intercept Closing Velocity Crossing Angle
Sequence Site (sec) (sec) (km/sec) (deg)
First shot Poland 190 690c 9.5 67.4
Second shot Poland No radar for first-shot kill KA (use KV TOM and hit/miss report)
Third shot Maine 1,373 1,664 11.9 14.9
Fourth shot Maine 1,694 1,821 12.1 37.5
NOTE: KA, kill assessment.
5-33
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-20 Case 2: Fylingdales radar out.
—Cape Cod GBX fills the third-shot commit role with the following result:
Launch Intercept Closing Velocity Crossing Angle
Sequence Site (sec) (sec) (km/sec) (deg)
First shot Poland 190 516 11.3 35.7
Second shot Poland No radar for first shot KA (use KV TOM and hit/miss report)
Third shot Maine 1,481 1,716c 12.1 18.5
Fourth shot Maine 1,746 1,849 11.7 50.3
As shown in the engagement map in Figure 5-20, with the Fylingdales radar out, the
second shot comes out of the interceptor site in Maine based on track data from either Thule
(launch at 1,373 sec) or from Cape Cod 108 sec later (1,481 sec). This second shot is provided
the TOM and hit/miss data from the first interceptor out of Poland even though no radar KA data
are available. This second shot is not a true SLS engagement, but it is given significant new data
by the BMC2 from the first shot KV sensor combined with the new Thule and/or Cape Cod GBX
track data and can be considered an SLS shot. The third shot, if necessary, is a true SLS
engagement.
Two Radars Out
Case 3, Figure 5-21. Azerbaijan and Fylingdales radars out: (1) Azerbaijan out
(earliest first-shot commit) and (2) Fylingdales GBX out (first- and second-shot
commit, third-shot KA). Thule fills third-shot commit role with the following result:
Launch Intercept Closing Velocity Crossing Angle
Sequence Site (sec) (sec) (km/sec) (deg)
First shot Poland No radar for interceptor commit out of Poland (satellite)
Second shot Poland No radar for interceptor commit out of Poland (satellite)
Third shot Maine 1,373 1,664 11.9 14.9
Fourth shot Maine 1,694 1,821 12.1 37.5
5-34
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE 5-21 Azerbaijan and Fylingdales radar out.
Figure 5-21 shows the system rollback to a single SLS capability when both of the
forward-based radars are out (Azerbaijan and Fylingdales). In this case the first-shot commit is
provided by the Thule GBX radar.
Three Radars Out
Case 4. Azerbaijan, Fylingdales, and Thule radars out: (1) Azerbaijan out (earliest
first-shot commit), (2) Fylingdales GBX out (first- and second-shot commit, third-
shot KA, (3) Thule out (third- shot commit). Cape Cod fills third shot commit role
with the following result:
Launch Intercept Closing Velocity Crossing Angle
Sequence Site (sec) (sec) (km/sec) (deg)
First shot Poland No radar for interceptor commit out of Poland (satellite)
Second shot Poland No radar for interceptor commit out of Poland (satellite)
Third shot Maine 1,481 1,716 12.1 18.5
Fourth shot Maine 1,746 1,849 11.7 50.3
If Azerbaijan, Fylingdales, and Thule are all out, then Cape Cod is left to provide the tracking
data necessary for a two-shot SLS engagement very similar to the one just discussed.
FINAL COMMENTS
Chapter 5 is intended to recommend the path forward for the United States to develop the
most effective BMD capability—particularly for homeland defense—taking into account the
surrounding operational, technical, and cost issues. This will take time, money, and careful
testing, but unless this is done, the system will not be able to work against any but the most
primitive attacks. The recommended path forward, GMD-E, involves a smaller, shorter burn
interceptor configuration building on development work already done by MDA under the KEI
program but with a different front end. The heavier, more capable KV with a larger onboard
sensor provides the capabilities absent in the current GMD system but responsive to the
recommended CONOPS discussed earlier. This evolved GBI would first be deployed at a new
third site in the northeast United States along with five additional X-band radars using doubled
5-35
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
THAAD AN/TPY-2 radars integrated together at each early warning system (EWS) site and at
Grand Forks, North Dakota. At a later time, the more capable interceptor would be retrofitted
into the silos at FGA, with the existing GBIs diverted to the targets program supporting future
operational flight tests.
As discussed throughout this report, missile defense is at a critical point. The title of this
report, Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for
U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives, underscores this critical
point and the objectives put forth by both the current and previous administrations. While the
current administration will need to consider the 20-yr LCCs associated with present and
proposed BMD systems as discussed and assessed throughout this report, it will also need to be
mindful of the funding wedge for the next 5 years. Figure 5-22 displays the MDA cummulative
annual funding wedge for the FY 2012 future years defense plan (FYDP) submitted by DOD to
the Congress. Here, the cumulative total obligation authority (TOA) from FY 2010 through FY
2016 is about $45 billion. It includes approximately $1.3 billion for the precision tracking and
surveillance system (PTSS); $1.6 billion for BMC3; and $500 million for advanced technology.
FIGURE 5-22 MDA funding wedge for FYDP submitted to Congress in FY 2011. The activities with an asterisk
include funds for PAA Phases I through III.
5-36
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Based on Figure 5-22 and the results presented in this report, the committee concludes as
follows with respect to the immediate future:
1. The current homeland defense plan, which consists of GMD augmented by early
intercept capabilities from Europe, is very expensive and has limited effectiveness.
2. PTSS costs four times as much to acquire and four to five times as much over its 20-
yr life cycle as the X-band radar suite recommended and it offers less value.
3. GMD-E has substantially lower LCC and provides the most effective capabilities. It
can be implemented within the same TOA over the next 5 years with an initial
operational capability of FY 2019 provided some low pay-off programs are
terminated and others are not started.
4. GMD-E’s predicted capability for SLS over most of North America relieves the
requirement, necessitated by current GMD limitations, for early intercepts from
Europe against threats from the Middle East toward North America. This decoupling
allows independent decisions for the later phase of European defense or any other
new task.
5-37
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Unclassified Appendixes
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
A
Terms of Reference
Section 232 of the Duncan Hunter National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year
2009 (Public Law 110-417) directed the Secretary to Defense to enter into agreement with the
National Academy of Sciences (NAS), not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of
this Act, in order to conduct an independent study of concepts and systems for boost-phase
missile defense. Specific elements of the study should include the following.
1. Content—the study should include: (a) the extent to which boost-phase missile
defense is technically feasible and practical; and (b) whether any demonstration efforts by the
Department of Defense of boost-phase missile defense technology existing as of the date of the
study (including the Airborne Laser and the Kinetic Energy Interceptor) have a high probability
of performing a boost-phase missile defense mission in an operationally effective, suitable, and
survivable manner.
2. Systems to be examined—the study should include: (a) the Airborne Laser; (b) the
Kinetic Energy Interceptor (land-based and sea-based options); and (c) other existing boost-phase
technology demonstration programs.
3. Factors to be evaluated—the study should include: (a) technical capability of the
system against scenarios identified in paragraph (4) below; (b) operational issues, including
operational effectiveness; (c) the results of key milestone tests conducted prior to preparation of
the report; (d) survivability; (e) suitability; (f) concept of operations, including basing
considerations; (g) operations and maintenance support; (h) command and control considerations,
including timelines for detection, decision-making, and engagement; (i) shortfall from intercepts;
(j) force structure requirements; (k) effectiveness against countermeasures;
(l) estimated cost of sustaining the system in the field; (m) reliability, availability, and
maintainability; (n) geographic considerations, including limitations on the ability to deploy
systems within operational range of potential targets; and (o) cost and cost-effectiveness,
including total lifecycle cost estimates.
4. Scenarios to be assessed—the study should include an assessment of each system
identified in paragraph (2) above regarding the performance and operational capabilities of the
system to: (a) counter short-range, medium-range, and intermediate-range ballistic missile threats
from rogue states to the deployed forces of the United States and its allies; and (b) defend the
territory of the United States against limited ballistic missile attack.
5. Comparison with non-boost systems—the study should include an assessment of the
performance and operational capabilities of non-boost missile defense systems to counter the
scenarios identified in paragraph (4) above. (The results under this paragraph shall be compared
to the results under paragraph (4) above.) For purposes of this paragraph, non-boost missile
defense systems include: (a) Patriot PAC-3 System and the Medium Extended Air Defense
System follow-on system; (b) Aegis Ballistic Missile Defense System, with all variants of the
Standard Missile-3 interceptor; (c) Terminal High Altitude Area Defense System; and (d)
Ground-Based Midcourse Defense System.
A-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
B
Biographies of Committee Members and Staff
L. David Montague (NAE) is an independent consultant and is retired president of the
Missile Systems Division at Lockheed Martin Missiles and Space and a former officer of
Lockheed Corporation. Mr. Montague has 50 years of experience in design, development, and
program management of military weapon systems, particularly ballistic missiles, low-cost space
launch vehicles, and ballistic missile defense systems. His experience includes the requirements,
development, and policy issues of strategic forces and defense systems to protect against
weapons of mass destruction. His expertise includes the definition, development, integration and
management of strategic and tactical standoff strike weapon systems, exo- and endoatmospheric
defenses for engaging these classes of threats, and the technologies and capabilities for guidance
and control, surveillance and threat detection, cueing and targeting of these systems. Mr.
Montague is a fellow of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics and received that
Institute’s Missile Systems Award in 1990. He has served on numerous scientific boards and
advisory committees, to include task forces for both the U. S. Army and Defense Science Board
and 8 years on the Navy Strategic Systems Steering Task Group. He was a member of the
American Physical Society study panel on boost-phase intercept systems for national missile
defense (published April 2003), served 3 years on the Los Alamos Laboratory Senior Advisory
Group, and was a member of NASA’s independent review group for constellation program
management (2007). Mr. Montague is a former member of the NRC’s Naval Studies Board and
its Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability. Mr. Montague received his
bachelor of mechanical engineering and master of engineering equivalent from Cornell
University in 1956.
Walter B. Slocombe is a partner at the law firm of Caplin&Drysdale and has served the
U. S. government in numerous positions throughout his career. He served as Under Secretary of
Defense for Policy from 1993 to 2000 and is former director of the DOD task force on Strategic
Arms Limitation Talks (SALT). He has also served as senior advisor for national defense in the
Coalition Provisional Authority for Iraq. In 2004, Mr. Slocombe was appointed by the President
of the United States to the Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States
Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction. He is a member of the International Advisory Board
of the Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces and a former member of the
Strategic Air Command Technical Advisory Committee. Mr. Slocombe served on the NRC’s
Committee on the Policy Consequences and Legal/Ethical Implications of Offensive Information
Warfare and the Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike Capability.
David K. Barton (NAE) is an independent consultant. He received an A. B. in physics
from Harvard College in 1949 and began his career as an engineering aid for the U. S. Army
Signal Corps at White Sands Proving Grounds in 1946. He served as radar engineer at White
Sands from 1949 to 1953 and at Signal Corps Engineering Laboratories at Fort Monmouth, New
Jersey, until 1955. In 1955, Mr. Barton joined the RCA Missile and Surface Radar Department
B-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
in Moorestown, New Jersey, as system engineer. He was awarded the RCA David W. Sarnoff
Award for Outstanding Achievement in Engineering in 1958. In 1963, Mr. Barton became a
consulting scientist to Raytheon Company at its Equipment Division in Wayland, Massachusetts,
and later to its Missile Systems Division in Bedford. He was vice president for engineering at
ANRO Engineering Inc. until 1984. Mr. Barton has served as member of the National Research
Council’s Air Force Studies Board, as chair of the Committee on the E-3A Radar, and as chair of
the Committee on Advanced Airborne Surveillance Radar. He is a fellowof the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and received its Centennial Medal in 1984 and its
Third Millennium Medal in 2000. He was named the IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques
Society Distinguished Microwave Lecturer in 1987-1988. His fields of research include radar
systems, the propagation of radar waves, radar tracking and measurement, and radar guidance of
missiles. He was a member of the American Physical Society study panel on boost-phase
intercept systems for national missile defense. Mr. Barton serves on the NRC’s Panel on
Survivability and Lethality Analysis.
Melvin H. “Mel” Eisman is a senior cost analyst in the Management Science
Department at the RAND Corporation. Prior to joining RAND in 1994, he worked at TRW
Space and Defense Sector, Northrop Grumman Aircraft Division, Magnavox Advanced Products
and Systems Company, General Dynamics, Naval Air Systems Command, and the Naval
Aviation Logistics Center. At RAND, Mr. Eisman has generated system life-cycle cost estimates
for analysis of alternative studies on future Air Force airborne tanker and electronic airborne
attack options and participated in cost-effectiveness studies of (1) unmanned airborne systems
platform/sensor force mix options for performing future Air Force missions, (2) countermeasures
and other security initiatives for improving passenger security at rail stations and airports, (3)
space-based and airborne intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systems force mix
options, (4) Air Force distributed small satellites over larger monolithic satellites, and (5)
reusable launch vehicle options for supporting future Air Force space missions. In addition, he
has recently been involved in assessing the utility of value models developed for DARPA’s
System F6 Fractionated Spacecraft Program within a DOD acquisition context; causal factors for
improving military space acquisitions in delivering capabilities within cost and schedule; and
performing independent program cost and risk assessments on one of JPL’s upcoming Earth
orbiting satellite missions. He is currently the RAND representative to the Air Force/NASA
Space Systems Cost Analysis Group and a member of the American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics (AIAA). Mr. Eisman received an M. S. in industrial engineering from Pennsylvania
State University.
David L. Fried has been an independent consultant since 1995. From 1993 to 1995 he
was a professor of physics at the Naval Postgraduate School. Before that, from 1970 (when he
founded the company) till 1993 (when he sold the company), Dr. Fried was the president of the
Optical Sciences Company, and prior to that, from 1961 to 1970, he was employed by Rockwell
International, where he held the position of manager in the Electro-Optical Laboratory of the
Autonetics Division. Dr. Fried served for 20 years on the U. S. Army Science Board (ASB). For
many years, he served on the ASB’s standing committee on ballistic missile defense. In the
1960s, Dr. Fried published a series of papers on the optical effects of atmospheric turbulence that
provided much of the analytic foundations for the development of adaptive optics systems and
that resulted in the definition of the quantity now known as Fried’s parameter. In 1981, Dr. Fried
B-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
carried out the first analysis evaluating and establishing the feasibility of the use of atmospheric
laser backscatter to control adaptive optics—a concept that now goes by the name of laser guide-
star. He then designed, managed the development of the hardware for, and supervised an
experiment that successfully demonstrated the validity of the laser guide-star concept. In 1993,
he received the SPIE Technology Achievement Award for his initial laser guide-star work. In
addition to his work related to optical propagation/turbulence effects/adaptive optics, Dr. Fried
has done work in a variety of other electro-optics-related fields such as the suppression of
infrared background clutter in moving target detection systems; analysis of laser speckle
statistics; analysis of the effect of photo-detection-event driven shot noise on the precision of
various types of optical measurements; the design and development of low-temperature-optics
long-wavelength infrared sensors for use in midcourse ballistic missile defense; and in the design
and performance analysis for space-based infrared sensors for missile and aircraft detection. He
has also been involved in the search for a sound approach to the midcourse decoy discrimination
problem for ballistic missile defense. Dr. Fried received a Ph. D. in physics from Rutgers
University.
Alec D. Gallimore is Arthur F. Thurnau Professor of Aerospace Engineering at the
University of Michigan, where he directs the Plasmadynamics and Electric Propulsion
Laboratory. Professor Gallimore is also an associate dean at the Horace H. Rackham School of
Graduate Studies, where he serves as the school’s liaison to 25 graduate programs and
departments in engineering, the physical sciences, and mathematics. Professor Gallimore is also
on the faculty of the applied physics program at Michigan, is the director of the NASA-funded
Michigan Space Grant Consortium, and is project director of the NSF-funded Michigan
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professorate. He received his Ph. D. in aerospace
engineering from Princeton University. His primary research interests include electric
propulsion, plasma diagnostics, space/reentry plasma simulation, use of plasma for energy
production and environmental remediation, and nanoparticle physics. He has experience with a
wide array of electric propulsion technologies including Hall thrusters, ion thrusters, arcjets,
radio frequency plasma sources, 100-kilowatt-class steady magnetoplasmadynamic (MPD)
thrusters, and megawatt-level quasi-steady MPD thrusters. Professor Gallimore has
implemented a variety of probe, microwave, and optical/laser plasma diagnostics. He serves on
the AIAA Electric Propulsion Technical Committee and is a fellow of AIAA. Professor
Gallimore is an associate editor for the Journal of Propulsion and Power and for the Joint Army
Navy NASA Air Force Journal of Propulsion and Energetics and has served on a number of
advisory boards for NASA and DOD including the U. S. Air Force Scientific Advisor Board
(AFSAB). He was awarded the Decoration for Meritorious Civilian Service in 2005 for his work
on the AFSAB. He is co-founder of ElectroDynamic Applications, Inc. (EDA), a high-tech
aerospace firm in Ann Arbor, Michigan, that specializes in plasma device engineering. Professor
Gallimore has served on numerous NRC committees, including the Committee on Future Air
Force Needs for Survivability and the Committee on Conventional Prompt Global Strike
Capability.
Gen Eugene E. Habiger, U. S. Air Force (ret.), is distinguished fellow and policy advisor
at the University of Georgia Center for International Trade and Security. General Habiger
retired as a general, serving as the Commander-in-Chief, United States Strategic Command,
where he was responsible for all U. S. Air Force and U. S. Navy strategic nuclear forces
B-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
supporting the national security strategy of strategic deterrence. In this position, he established
an unprecedented military-to-military relationship with his Russian counterparts, fostering
extraordinary confidence building and openness. After his retirement from the U. S. Air Force
General Habiger was appointed the U. S. Department of Energy’s director of security and
emergency operations. He serves as a distinguished fellow and policy adviser with the
University of Georgia Center for International Trade and Security, where he assisted with the
Center’s international programs aimed at preventing weapons proliferation and reducing nuclear
dangers. He has served as president and CEO of the San Antonio Water System and currently is
on the Nuclear Threat Initiative’s board of directors. He also serves as a senior fellow at the
Gorbachev Foundation. General Habiger served on the NRC’s Committee on Conventional
Prompt Global Strike Capability.
Harvey L. Lynch recently retired after serving as an assistant director in the Particle
Physics and Astrophysics directorate of the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory (SLAC). He
has over 40 years of experience in experimental high-energy particle physics (HEP). During that
time he worked at laboratories in the United States, Germany, and Switzerland on experiments in
the fundamental interactions of particles. One experiment resulted in the discovery of a new
quark (charm), which launched a revolution in particle physics. He has been one of the leading
members of the design team for three different HEP detectors, two at the SLAC in Menlo Park,
California, and one at the Deutsches Elektronen Synchrotron in Hamburg, Germany. He was a
deputy for detector technical liaison to the associate director for physics research at the
superconducting supercollider (SSC) in Dallas, Texas. In that role he had the responsibility of
technical oversight for the design of two very large HEP detectors planned for the SSC. His
experience in arms control/defense-related work includes a leave of absence in 1986 spent at the
Center for International Security and Arms Control at Stanford, when he prepared the report
Technical Evaluation of Offensive Uses of SDI, which looked at the use of laser beams from
space as weapons against ground or airborne targets. In 1989, he was part of the team from the
U. S. Natural Resources Defense Council working with the Soviet Academy of Sciences for the
joint “Black Sea Experiment” (on board a Soviet cruiser as part of a verification regime for
submarine-launched cruise missile control by the passive detection of an onboard nuclear
weapon by means of the radiation it emits. Most recently, he was a member of the American
Physical Society team studying boost-phase missile interception.
Kenneth C. Malley, VADM, U. S. Navy (ret.), is currently an independent consultant.
Admiral Malley retired from the Navy as a vice admiral after 37 years of service. He graduated
from the U. S. Naval Academy in 1957 and served on destroyers in the Atlantic fleet until 1960,
when he attended the U. S. Naval Postgraduate School, graduating in 1963 with an M. S. E. E. His
first engineering duty assignment was as head of Navy Gun and Fire Control Systems and
program manager for the Navy’s first digital fire control system—the MK-86 GFCS. From 1967
to 1991 he served in various assignments in the Strategic Systems Program Office, becoming the
director from 1985 to 1991. In his final assignment, Admiral Malley served as commander,
Naval Sea Systems Command, with responsibility for all naval ships and weapons systems,
except fleet ballistic missiles, and all shore activities, such as weapon laboratories and shipyards
supporting the deployed systems. After retirement from the Navy in 1994, he held several vice
presidential positions at ARINC, Inc., headquarters in Annapolis, Maryland, until 2002.
B-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
C. Wendell Mead is chief executive officer and chief technical director at AGRI, Inc.,
where he serves as a subject matter expert on ballistic missile defense and aerospace systems
engineering, simulation, analysis, test, training and evaluation projects. He has broad
experience in aerospace and missile system concept definition, simulation, analysis,
engineering, integration, test, training, and evaluation; strategic analysis and defense policy
formulation; cost analysis; logistics; and test range operations and maintenance. Previously,
Mr. Mead held high level positions at SRS Technologies, U. S. Army Ballistic Missile Defense
Advanced Technology Center, Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, and NASA Marshall
Space Flight Center. Mr. Mead has M. S. degrees from Stanford University (management) and
Auburn University (aerospace engineering).
Daniel L. Montgomery, BG, U. S. Army (ret.), is the CEO of Strategic Defense
Solutions, a start-up founded in 2009 as a service-disabled, veteran-owned small business
providing strategic and defense planning services. Prior to joining Strategic Defense Solutions,
he served as director of Northrop Grumman’s Air and Missile Defense market area. Retiring
from the U. S. Army in 1999 with the rank of brigadier general, he ended a 32-yr military career
with his last assignment as the senior acquisition executive for Air and Missile Defense Systems.
General Montgomery held many senior management and leadership roles, including the U. S.
Army’s senior acquisition executive for air and missile defense systems. Today, General
Montgomery serves as a member of the board of directors for the Chamber of Commerce of
Huntsville/Madison County and as a member of the Association of the U. S. Army, the Navy
League of the United States, the National Defense Industrial Association, and the Aerospace
Industries Association. He has received many awards and decorations, including the
Distinguished Service Medal, the Legion of Merit, the Bronze Star Medal, and the Meritorious
Service Medal.
C. Kumar Patel (NAS/NAE) is a professor of physics and astronomy, chemistry, and
electrical engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). He is also the
founder and CEO of Pranalytica, Inc., a Santa Monica, California, company that carries out R&D
and manufactures and sells trace gas sensors for in situ detection of chemical warfare agents and
explosives, systems for standoff detection of explosives (IEDs), and high-power mid-wave
infrared and long-wave infrared quantum cascade lasers for applications in defense, homeland
security, and commercial systems. He served as vice chancellor for research at UCLA from
1993 to 1999. Prior to joining UCLA in March 1993, he was the executive director of the
Research, Materials Science and Engineering and Academic Affairs Division at AT&T Bell
Laboratories, Murray Hill, New Jersey. He joined Bell Laboratories in 1961, when he began his
career by carrying out research in the field of gas lasers. He is the inventor of the carbon dioxide
laser, which is one of the most widely used lasers in industry. Dr. Patel received his Ph. D. from
Stanford University in 1961. In 1988 he was awarded an honorary doctor of science degree from
the New Jersey Institute of Technology. In 1996 Dr. Patel was awarded the National Medal of
Science by the President of the United States. Dr. Patel serves on the NRC’s Committee on
Developments in Detector Technology and its Panel on Sensors and Electron Devices.
Jonathan D. Pollack is a senior fellow with the John L. Thornton China Center at the
Brookings Institution. Before that he was professor of Asian and Pacific studies and chairman of
the Asia-Pacific Studies Group at the U. S. Naval War College. Between 2000 and 2004 he
served as chairman of the College’s Strategic Research Department. Prior to joining the War
B-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
College faculty in 2000, Dr. Pollack was affiliated with the RAND Corporation, where he served
in a wide range of research and management positions. His major research interests include
Chinese national security strategy; U. S. foreign and defense policy in Asia and the Pacific;
Korean politics and foreign policy; and nuclear weapons and international politics. He is a
member of the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), the Council on Foreign
Relations, the National Committee on U. S.-China Relations, and an emeritus member of the
Committee on International Security and Arms Control, a standing committee of the National
Academy of Sciences. He has authored numerous research monographs, edited volumes, journal
articles, book chapters, and strategic commentaries, with particular emphasis on Chinese military
development, U. S.-China relations, East Asian international relations, and U. S. defense strategy
in East Asia. During 2008 and 2009 he undertook research on the rethinking of Korean
nuclearization, supported by a grant from the John T. and Catherine D. MacArthur Foundation.
A book based on this research, No Exit: North Korea, Nuclear Weapons, and International
Security, was published by the IISS in 2010 in the Institute’s new Adelphi Books series.
David M. Van Wie is chief technologist for precision engagement at the Johns Hopkins
University Applied Physics Laboratory, where his principal research interests are in aerospace
vehicle design and development with emphasis on propulsion systems and advanced
aerodynamics for supersonic and hypersonic flight vehicles. Dr. Van Wie also holds
appointments as research professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at Johns
Hopkins University and lecturer in the Department of Aerospace Engineering at the University
of Maryland. He received B. S., M. S., and Ph. D. degrees in aerospace engineering from the
University of Maryland and an M. S. in electrical engineering, with emphasis on radar and
communication systems, from Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Van Wie has served on numerous
scientific boards and advisory committees, to include the NRC Committee on Conventional
Prompt Global Strike Capability.
David R. Vaughan is a senior engineer in the Technology and Applied Science
Department at the RAND Corporation. Prior to joining RAND in 1986, he worked at R&D
Associates, the Institute for Defense Analyses, and the McDonnell Douglas Aerospace
Corporation. At RAND, Dr. Vaughan has performed research on countering hostile UAVs,
nontraditional ISR, and counterinsurgency aircraft. Previously, he supported studies on close air
support: technology and tactics; space support for military operations; and intelligence,
surveillance and reconnaissance end-to-end analysis. Earlier, he led projects on the
reconnaissance and surveillance force mix, which analyzed airborne and space SIGINT, IMINT
and MTI sensors and platforms; theater missile defense/critical mobile targets, which performed
operational and technical analyses of boost- and ascent-phase intercept, and air-to-surface attack
operations; advanced technical options for conventional cruise missiles; and a net assessment of
U. S. and Soviet strategic missile penetration systems. At R&D Associates, he worked on U. S.
and Soviet offense and defense systems. At the Institute for Defense Analyses, his work
included surface-to-air interceptor missile performance limits, submarine-launched ballistic
missile performance limits, and radar tracking and prediction analysis. He was a member of the
American Physical Society study panel on boost-phase intercept systems for national missile
defense and an ad hoc member of an Air Force Scientific Advisory Board on theater air and
missile defense. He is an associate fellow of the AIAA and a recipient of the Leo Szilard Award
B-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
of the American Physical Society. Dr. Vaughan received his Ph. D. in mechanical engineering
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Dean Wilkening is at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, having recently moved
from serving as a senior research scientist at the Center for International Security and
Cooperation at Stanford University. He holds a Ph. D. in physics from Harvard University and
worked at the RAND Corporation prior to coming to Stanford. His major research interests
include nuclear strategy and policy, arms control, the proliferation of nuclear and biological
weapons, bioterrorism, ballistic missile defense, and energy and security. His most recent
research focuses on the technical, strategic, and political aspects of ballistic missile defense
deployments in northeast Asia, south Asia, and Europe. Prior work focused on the technical
feasibility of boost-phase ballistic missile defense interceptors. His recent work on bioterrorism
focuses on understanding the scientific and technical uncertainties associated with predicting the
outcome of hypothetical airborne biological attacks and the human effects of inhalation anthrax,
with the aim of devising more effective civil defenses. He has participated in, and briefed,
several National Academy of Science committees on biological terrorism and consults for
several U. S. national laboratories and government agencies. Dr. Wilkening served on the NRC’s
Science and Technology for Countering Terrorism: Biological Panel.
Staff
Charles F. Draper is director of the National Research Council’s Naval Studies Board
(NSB). He joined the NSB in 1997 as Program Officer then Senior Program Officer and in 2003
became associate director and acting director of the NSB. During his tenure with the NSB, Dr.
Draper has served as study director on a wide range of topics aimed at helping the Department of
the Navy and DOD with their scientific, technical, and strategic planning. He served as study
director for the report Conventional Prompt Global Strike: Issues for 2008 and Beyond. Before
joining the NSB, Dr. Draper was the lead mechanical engineer at S. T. Research Corporation,
where he provided technical and program management support for satellite Earth station and
small satellite design. He received his Ph. D. in mechanical engineering from Vanderbilt
University in 1995; his doctoral research was conducted at the Naval Research Laboratory
(NRL), where he used an atomic-force microscope to measure the nanomechanical properties of
thin-film materials. In parallel with his graduate student duties, Dr. Draper was a mechanical
engineer with Geo-Centers, Inc., working on-site at NRL on the development of an underwater
X-ray backscattering tomography system used for the nondestructive evaluation of U. S. Navy
sonar domes on surface ships.
B-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
C
Summary of Meetings
January 13-15, 2010, in Washington, D. C. First committee meeting: briefings on
congressional perspectives from the Senate Armed Services Committee; introduction to ballistic
missile defense systems (BMDS) from the Missile Defense Agency (MDA); BMDS and early
intercept overview, MDA; Department of Defense (DOD) perspectives, Office of the Deputy
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear and Missile Defense Policy; Department of State
perspectives, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, verification compliance implementation;
intelligence community perspectives, Office of the Director, National Intelligence; threat and
geopolitical implications, MDA; early intercept considerations, MDA; phased adaptive approach,
MDA; Aegis, MDA; kinetic energy interceptor (KEI), MDA; airborne laser, MDA;
miscellaneous other boost-phase concepts, MDA; command and control, battle management, and
communications, MDA.
February 16-19, 2010, in Washington, D. C. Second committee meeting: terminal high-
altitude area defense (THAAD), MDA; Patriot advanced capability 3 (PAC-3), Army PEO
Missiles and Space; Medium Extended Air Defense System (MEADS), Army PEO Missiles and
Space; Aegis (more details), MDA and the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics
Laboratory; ground-based interceptor (GBI) system, MDA; non-Aegis radars, MDA.
March 16-19, 2010, in Washington, D. C.(at the National Academies and at MDA
Headquarters). Third committee meeting: BMDS discrimination, MDA; threat information
relevant to BMDS, MDA; radio frequency discrimination, MDA; BMDS interceptor
discrimination and handover, MDA; airborne laser (ABL) system performance, MDA; KEI,
MDA; optical signature and discrimination phenomenology, MDA; current concepts for space-
based approaches to boost-phase/ascent-phase intercept, MDA; description of existing and
planned boost-phase/early-intercept phase technology demonstration programs, MDA.
April 20-23, 2010, in Washington, D. C. Fourth committee meeting: space system
architecture, MDA; operational and technical details of the space-based infrared system
(SBIRS), SBIRS Program Office, Aerospace Corporation and Lockheed Martin; operational and
technical details of forward-based X-band radars, MDA, Mitre Corporation, and Raytheon;
operational and technical details of ground-based radars, MDA, MITRE Corporation, and
Raytheon; operational and technical capabilities of the Clear, Thule, and Fylingdale radars; status
and capabilities of the enhanced perimeter acquisition radar characterization system and PAVE
phased-array warning system, MDA, MITRE Corporation, and Raytheon; operational and
technical details of airborne sensors under consideration for supporting early intercept,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT); current and emerging electro-optical sensor
technologies, Utah State University, the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory,
and the Aerospace Corporation; optical signature and discrimination phenomenology, MDA.
May 18-21, 2010, in Washington, D. C. Fifth committee meeting: policy considerations
related to study terms of reference, including the Ballistic Missile Defense Review and the
Nuclear Posture Review, Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, Nuclear and Missile Defense
Policy, Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD); acquisition and technical considerations
C-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
related to study terms of reference, Deputy Director, Strategic Warfare, OSD for Acquisition,
Technology, and Logistics; operational, policy, technical, and other considerations related to
study terms of reference, director of the MDA; ballistic missile defense requirement and
considerations related to study terms of reference, director, Joint Integrated Air and Missile
Defense/Deputy Director for Force Protection, Joint Staff, J-8; perspectives on study terms of
reference, NAS, NAE, and IOM members; perspectives on the study terms of reference,
president of the Center for Security Policy, director of the Nuclear Strategy and Nonproliferation
Initiative, the New America Foundation, MIT, Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Union
of Concerned Scientists; and threat description and projections, Office of the Director, National
Intelligence.
June 15-17, 2010, at Redstone Arsenal, Huntsville, Alabama. Sixth committee meeting:
Missile and Space Intelligence Center (MSIC) perspectives, technical director, MSIC; ground-
based midcourse defense (GMD) perspectives, MDA and the Naval Surface Warfare Command;
comprehensive discrimination briefings for early-intercept, ascent, and midcourse phases: threat
identification toolbox, MDA and MIT; comprehensive discrimination briefings for early-
intercept, ascent, and midcourse phases: field observations of ballistic missile threats, MDA and
MIT; comprehensive discrimination briefings for early-intercept, ascent, and midcourse phases:
AN/TPY-2 and SBX radar discrimination, MDA and MIT; comprehensive discrimination
briefings for early-intercept, ascent, and midcourse phases: radar measurements of debris and
clutter, MDA and MIT; comprehensive discrimination briefings for early-intercept, ascent, and
midcourse phases: ground-based midcourse (GM) flight test data, MDA and Boeing;
comprehensive discrimination briefings for early-intercept, ascent, and midcourse phases: Aegis
BMD and MDA; comprehensive discrimination briefings for early-intercept, ascent, and
midcourse phases: critical measurements flight test program, MDA and MIT; comprehensive
discrimination briefings for early-intercept, ascent, and midcourse phases: midcourse space
experiment EO/IR data exploitation, MDA and MIT; GMD perspectives, MDA, Boeing,
Northrup Grumman, and Raytheon; Iran scenario, MDA; Israeli perspectives, consultant;
THAAD perspectives, Lockheed; PAC-3 perspectives, MDA.
June 23, 2010, at Lockheed Martin, Sunnyvale, California. Seventh meeting
(subcommittee meeting perspectives from Lockheed Martin on boost-phase missile defense
systems and Lockheed Martin’s assessment of performance and operational capabilities,
Lockheed Martin.
July 13-16, 2010, in Washington, D. C. Eighth committee meeting: contractor
perspectives, Northrop Grumman, Boeing, Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, and Alliant Tech Systems; Air Force/MDA Operational Feasibility Study
on Air-Launched Hit-to-Kill, Headquarters, USAF (A5XS) and MDA.
August 17-18, at Fort Greely, Alaska, and at Colorado Springs, Colorado. Ninth
committee meeting: briefing by MDA and Alaska 49th Missile Defense Battalion (GMD-BN);
distributed multiechelon training system (DMETS), NORTHCOM J31; SIV/SILO visit,
NORTHCOM J31; missile field tour, NORTHCOM J31; missile defense element, NORTHCOM
J31; DMETS run and discussion, NORTHCOM J31; Two-command brief, North American
Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) and NORTHCOM; commander, NORAD and
NORTHCOM brief; ballistic missile defense intelligence update and discussion, NORTHCOM
J31; observation of Night Blue exercise, NORTHCOM J31.
September 12-17, 2010, at Woods Hole, Massachusetts. Tenth committee meeting:
writing meeting, full committee.
C-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
October 19-22, 2010, in Washington, D. C. Eleventh committee meeting: writing
meeting, entire committee.
November 8-12, 2010, at NAS Beckman Center, Irvine, California. Twelfth committee
meeting: writing meeting, full committee.
January 18-21, 2011, at Washington, D. C. Thirteenth committee meeting: writing
meeting, full committee.
February 14-18, 2011, at Washington, D. C. Fourteenth committee meeting: writing
meeting, partial committee
March 7-11, 2011, at RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, Californina. Fifteenth
committee meeting: writing meeting, partial committee.
March 20-25, 2011, at NAS Beckman Center, Irvine, California. Sixteenth committee
meeting: writing meeting, full committee.
May 16-20, 2011 at Washington, D. C., and at RAND Corporation, Santa Monica,
California. Seventeenth committee meeting: writing session, partial committee at East and
West Coast sites.
July 27-29, 2011 at Washington, D. C. Eighteenth committee meeting: response-to-
review session, partial committee.
C-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
D
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AAW antiaircraft warfare
ABI airborne-based interceptor
ABIR airborne infrared
ABL Airborne Laser
ABM antiballistic missile
ABMDA Advanced Ballistic Missile Defense Agency
ABT air-breathing threat
ACS attitude control system
ADSAM air-directed surface-to-air missile
AEU antenna equipment unit
AHTK airborne hit to kill
ALCM air-launched cruise missile
ALHK air-launched hit-to-kill
ALTB airborne laser test bed
AMaRVe advanced maneuvering reentry vehicle
AMD air and missile defense
AMRAAM advanced medium-range air-to-air missile
AMTI air moving target indication
AN/TPY Army Navy/transportable radar surveillance
AO adaptive optics
AoA analysis of alternatives
AOR area of responsibility
APS American Physical Society
ASALM advanced strategic air-launched cruise missile
ASAT antisatellite
ASCM antiship cruise missile
ASCMD antiship cruise missile defense
ASUW antisurface warfare
ASW antisubmarine warfare
ATDLS advanced tactical data link system
AT&L Acqusition, Technology and Logistics
ATR automatic target recognition
AUPC average unit production cost
AWACS airborne warning and control system
AWS Aegis weapon system
BAMBI ballistic missile boost intercept
BAT BMC4I advanced technology
BDA battle damage assessment
D-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
BILL beacon illuminator laser
BMC2 battle management command and control
BMC3 battle management command, control, and communications
BMC4I battle management command, control, communications,
computing, and intelligence
BMD ballistic missile defense
BMDO Ballistic Missile Defense Office
BPI boost-phase intercept
C2 command and control
C2BMC command and control battle management center
C3 command, control, and communications
C3I command, control, communications, and intelligence
C4ISR command, control, communications, computing, intelligence,
surveillance, and reconnaissance
CALCM conventional air-launched cruise missile
CAP combat air patrol
CBO Congressional Budget Office
CC&D camououflage, concealment, and deception
CC&D common command and decision (Navy)
C&D command and decision
CE combat enhancement
CEC cooperative engagement capability
CEP cooperative engagement processor
CEP circular error probable
CEU cooling equipment unit
CID combat identification
CINC commander in chief
CIWS close-in weapon system
CMD cruise missile defense
CME Caribou, Maine
COCOM combatant commander
COIL chemical oxygen-iodine laser
CONOPS concept of operations
CONUS continental United States
COTS commercial off-the-shelf
CRD capstone requirements document
CSS-5 medium-range, road-mobile, solid-propellant ballistic missile (China)
CSV cable support vehicle
DACS divert and attitude control system
DARPA Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
DASO demonstration and shakedown (missile)
DEM/VAL demonstration and validation
DISA Defense Information System Agency
DOD Department of Defense
D-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
DOE Department of Energy
DOF degrees of freedom
DOT Department of Transportation
DSP Defense Support Program
DTRM dual-thrust rocket motor
E2 enhanced effectiveness
EAM emergency action message
ECS engagement control station
EEU electronic equipment unit
EI early intercept
EIT exoatmospheric interceptor technology
EKV exoatmospheric kill vehicle
EMD engineering and manufacturing development
EMP electromagnetic pulse
EO electro-optics
EOC early operational capability
EOR engage on remote
EPP electronic power plant
ERINT extended-range interceptor
ERIS exoatmospheric reentry interceptor system
ESM electronic support measure
EW electronic warfare
EWS early warning system
FAIR flying along infrared
FBM fleet ballistic missile
FBX X-band radar (standalone version)
FEWS future early warning system
FGA Fort Greely, Alaska
FLIR forward-looking infrared
FOC final operational capability
FU fire unit
FY fiscal year
FYDP future years defense plan
GBI ground-based interceptor
GBR ground-based radar
GBX ground-based X-band radar
GEM general energy management
GEO geosynchronous orbit
GMD Ground-Based Midcourse Defense
GMD-E Ground-Based Midcourse Defense-Evolved
GMTI ground moving target indication
GN&C guidance, navigation, and control
GPS Global Positioning System
D-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
HALO-2 High Altitude Observatory 2 (program)
HEL high-energy laser
HF/DF hydrogen fluoride/deuterium fluoride
HOE homing overlay experiment
HPI high-performance interceptor
HTK hit to kill
HTPB hydroxyl terminated polybutadiene
I&T interceptor integration and testing
IBCS integrated battle command system
ICBM intercontinental ballistic missile
ICD initial capabilities document
IDT IFICS data terminal
IFICS in-flight interceptor communications station
IFTU in-flight target update
IMINT imagery intelligence
IMU inertial measurement unit
INS inertial navigation system
IOC initial operational capability
IOT&E initial operational test and evaluation
IP Internet Protocol
IR infrared
IRBM intermediate-range ballistic missile
ISR intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
ITOF interceptor total time of flight
JTO Joint Technology Office
KEI kinetic energy interceptor
KEP kinetic energy projectile
KEW kinetic-energy vehicle
KKV kinetic-kill vehicle
KV kill vehicle
LADAR laser detection and ranging (laser radar)
LAN local area network
LCC life-cycle cost
LCS launch control system
LIDAR laser identification and ranging
LOR launch on remote
LOS line of sight
LRIP low rate initial production
LSI lead system integrator
LSRBM long- and short-range ballistic missiles
LWIR long-wave infrared
MARB maneuverable reentry body
D-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
MaRV maneuverable reentry vehicle
MCS mission control system
MDAP major defense acquisition program
MDA Missile Defense Agency
MDIOC Missile Defense Integrated Operations Center
MEADS Medium Extended Air Defense System
MILCON military construction
MKV multiple kill vehicle
MLRB medium-lift reentry body
MRBM medium-range ballistic missile
MSE missile segment enhancement (improved PAC-3)
MSX midcourse space experiment
MTCR missile technology control regime
MTS-B multispectral targeting system, version B
MWIR midwavelength infrared
NAS National Academy of Sciences
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NCA National Command Authority
NCADE network-centric airborne defense element
NGA National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
NGAM next-generation Aegis missile
NMD national missile defense
NRC National Research Council
NRO National Reconnaissance Office
O&S operations and support
O&S sunk operations and support (expended)
OC operations central
OCM overland cruise missile
OCMD overland cruise missile defense
OIF Operation Iraqi Freedom
OPEVAL operational evaluation
ORD operational requirements document
OSD Office of Secretary of Defense
PAA phased adaptive approach
PAC-3 Patriot advanced capability 3
PB President’s budget
PBDI postboost, predeployment intercept
PG precision-guided
PGM precision-guided munition
PPLI precision position location information
PPU prime power unit
PTSS Precision Tracking and Surveillance System
D-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
QDR Quadrennial Defense Review
QOS quality of service
RB reentry body
R&D research and development
RCS radar cross section
RDT&E research, development, testing, and evaluation
RF radio frequency
RIM-66C ship-launched medium-range, surface-to-air missile (Navy)
(first version of SM-2)
ROE rules of engagement
ROK Republic of Korea
ROM rough order of magnitude
RS radar set
RV reentry vehicle
S&T science and technology
SAFB Schriever Air Force Base, Colorado
SAM surface-to-air missile
SAR synthetic aperture radar
SBI space-based interceptor
SBX sea-based X-band radar
SBIRS spaced-based infrared aystem
SDACS solid divert and atitude control system
SDI Strategic Defense Initiative
SDIO Strategic Defense Initiative Organization
SECDEF Secretary of Defense
SEP spherical error probable
SES shoot-engage-shoot
SFS shoot-fail-shoot
SIAP single integrated air picture
SIGINT signal intelligence
SIOP single integrated operational picture
SLBM submarine-launched ballistic missile
SLS shoot-look-shoot
SLV space launch vehicle
SM standard missile
SM-3 Standard Missile-3
SMRBM short- and medium-range ballistic missiles
SOF Special Operations Forces
SORT Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty
SPY-1 naval phased-array radar
SRBM short-range ballistic missile
SSP Strategic Systems Programs
STAP space-time adaptive processing
START Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
D-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
STRATCOM U. S. Strategic Command
STSS Space Tracking and Surveillance System
SV support vehicle
T2 go-time to go
TAD theater air defense
TADIL tactical digital information link
TAMD theater air and missile defense
TBM theater ballistic missile
TBMD theater ballistic missile defense
TCS theater combat system
TD-2 Taepo’o-dong-2 missile (North Korea)
TDACS Throttleable Divert and Attitude Control System
TEL transporter erector launcher
TFCC THAAD fire control and communications
THAAD Terminal (formerly theater) High-Altitude Area Defense
THEL tactical high-energy laser
TILL tracking illuminator laser
TLE target location error
TMD theater missile defense
TOC tactical operations center
TOM target object map
TOS tactical operations station
TPS thermal protection system
TPY-2 forward-based X-band radar
T/R transmit/receive
TRL technology readiness level
TSC theater surface combatant
TSG tactical support group
TSRM third-stage rocket motor
TT&C tracking, telemetry, and communications
TTPs tactics, techniques, and procedures
TVM target via the missile
TWAA tactical warning and attack assessment
UAV unmanned aerial vehicle
UEWR upgraded early warning radar
UHF ultrahigh frequency
USA United States Army
USAF United States Air Force
USMC United States Marine Corps
USN United States Navy
VAFB Vandenberg Air Force Base, California
V Burnout velocity
bo
VLS vertical launch system
D-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
VSR volume search radar
WMD weapons of mass destruction
XBR X-band radar
D-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
E
System Cost Methodology
SCOPE OF LIFE CYCLE ESTIMATES
Life cycle costs (LCC) for each of the existing and proposed space-based early warning
IR systems, ground- and sea-based radar systems, and defensive layers of intercept systems are
defined as consisting of development, production, and sustainment costs with the last named
over a 20-yr period. For the purposes of this study, LCC is divided into these three categories to
allow assessing the relative costs across the mix of interceptor and sensor system options for
improving missile defense.
Development costs are the cost of engineering activities needed to design and develop
baseline and block upgrades of interceptor boosters, kill vehicles (KVs), early warning sensor
and radar systems, and other supporting components and infrastructure, with Missile Defense
Agency (MDA) annual budget requests for funds reported as research, development, test, and
evaluation (RDT&E) appropriations consistent with the military services.1
Procurement costs for the manufacture of missile interceptor KVs, early warning sensor
and radar systems, and associated equipment, including, as needed, the purchasing of Aegis-class
ships. Construction costs are included as part of procurement and defined as those activities
required to build the physical infrastructure, including power generators and maintenance
facilities, that supports a given missile defense system or ship-based radar system. Procurement
cost also includes the costs of integrating the applicable systems noted above into the existing
infrastructure.2 In addition, the procurement cost of interceptors includes the production of the
total quantity committed for the inventory to achieve full operational capability (FOC).
Sustainment costs are the costs of the routine efforts to operate and maintain the system
over a nominal 20-yr lifetime. Depending on the expected service life of the assets, sustainment
costs can include the modification, upgrades, and/or replacement costs of procuring new systems
as needed.
Following development and during the sustainment phase and for the purposes of
maintaining the necessary operational proficiency, readiness, and training; sustainment costs
include costs for conducting engagement exercises and missile tests, which in turn include the
costs of procuring test interceptors, target missiles, parts, and so on; and the sustaining
engineering costs for performing the tests, assessing the missile’s performance, diagnosing
1The breakout and definition of the three categories of cost, especially as they relate to the life cycle cost of
ballistic missile interceptors are consistent with recent Congressional Budget Office (CBO) reports on missile
defense.
2To account for this cost for ground-based interceptor systems similar to the ground-based missile defense (GMD)
boost-phase intercept (BPI) systems, the committee applied a factor of 40 percent to account for costs of integrating
the interceptor system and subsystems into the existing infrastructure. The integration activities are assumed to
include assembly, installation, and integration at the ground-based interceptor launch site comparable to the silos
and other infrastructure and the missile fields at Fort Greely, Alaska (FGA). This factor of 40 percent agrees with
previous CBO reports on missile defense.
E-1
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
potential success and root causes of failure events as part of the overall integrated system test
plans toward achieving the system’s overall operational readiness and training required.3
RELATIONSHIP OF LIFE CYCLE COST ESTIMATES TO MDA BUDGET
For the purposes of this study, LCC are separated into development, production, and
sustainment costs to enable assessing relative costs across system options for improving missile
defense. It should be pointed out that through the DOD FY 2011 President’s Budget (PB),
submitted to Congress in February 2010, funding for MDA included funding for production
(manufacturing) and sustainment operations, all under the single budget category of RDT&E.
However, MDA’s most recent budget justification materials for the FY 2012 PB submitted to
Congress in February 2011, separated out what were formerly RDT&E program funds into
procurement, military construction (MILCON), and the operations and maintenance (O&M)
program element funds.
The basis for estimates of 20-yr sustainment costs for the MDA systems and the
associated funds required will consist of both MDA RDT&E (procurement-related) budgets and
the military service’s O&M and military personnel (MILPERS) funds, with specific sustainment
responsibilities identified in system-unique memoranda of agreement (MOAs). As stated by
LTG Patrick J. O’Reilly, USA, Director, Missile Defense Agency, defines operations and
support (O&S) responsibilities including in the majority of cases MDA’s role in the material
sustainment and funds for procuring replacement spares and the implementation of P3I
modifications of fielded systems. Breakout of sustainment costs includes training costs, routine
maintenance costs, operational tests, and ongoing operational integration.
“Should” vs. “Will” Cost Guidance for Bounding the Range Estimates
Consistent with the Memorandum for Secretaries of the Military Departments and
Directors of the Defense Agencies issued on November 3, 2010, and effective November 15,
2010, the committee made a concerted effort to incorporate the guidance on developing “should
cost” targets as one of its “sound” estimating techniques.4
The committee generated 20-yr LCC range estimates for each of the committee’s
recommended systems and those recently initiated by MDA systems based on first assessing the
current technical and manufacturing maturity of all the systems and then generating “should”
cost estimates as the lower bound (or minimum) costs based on the following:
Scrutinizing every element of program cost,
Assessing whether each element can be reduced by, for example, challenging the
learning curves of similar systems, and
3Consistent with previous CBO reports, the committee assumed that the additional number of test interceptors that
need to be procured is based one test conducted every 2 years over the 20-yr lifetime of the system. The test plan is
assumed to have two purposes: (1) testing out the performance of the current system baseline design of the
interceptors, which includes any improvements to the booster stages as well as to the KV propulsion and IR seeker
or divert systems and (2), from an event-driven perspective for demonstrating the capability of intercepting target
missiles in scenarios mirroring threats from potential adversaries.
4The OSD policy on this subject is based on the guidance described in the “Drive Productivity Growth Through
Will Cost/Should Cost Management” article, issued by the Defense Acquisition University (DAU) Acquisition
Community Connection.
E-2
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Applying other recently implemented or proposed industry productivity
improvements as part of reducing the total costs of doing business with the
government, including, for example by reducing overhead rates, indirect costs, and
other contractor cost-cutting measures.
The OSD policy states that the metric of success for “should cost” management is leading
to annual productivity increases of a few percent from all ongoing contracted activities as
program managers execute at lower cost than budgeted. OSD policy guidance believes industry
can succeed in this environment because OSD and the military services will tie better system
performance to higher corporate profits and because affordable programs will be less likely to
face cancellation.
This is in contrast with system costs based a program’s “will” cost, on which the
committee bases its upper bound, or maximum, estimates. These estimates are focused on
business-as-usual costs similar to comparable programs in the past where the requested annual
budget was fully obligated and expended over time. The higher “will” cost estimate is also used
as the basis of the independent cost estimate (ICE) performed by the OSD Cost Assessment and
Policy Evaluation (CAPE) office for establishing program budgets that support major acquisition
milestone reviews. As mentioned, the committee based these maximum cost targets on
analogous systems and program expenditures over comparable acquisition phases where
reasonable efficiency- and productivity-enhancing efforts were undertaken. This approach to
estimating a system’s “will” upper bound cost targets is consistent with and similar to the CAPE
ICE estimating methods and program budget results expected for all ACAT I programs as they
advance through the major milestones of the acquisition process.
Observations on System “Should Cost” Comparisons
In looking at previously stated $71 million to $85 million average unit procurement cost
for the current and projected ground-based interceptor all up round, the committee wondered
how that cost compared with the cost for other weapons of comparable capabilities and
complexity. It extracted costs and quantities from DOD Selected Acquisition Reports (SARs)
for several programs that allowed it to compare RDT& E efforts and early unit all up missile
round costs.
Several of the U. S. Navy’s Trident program SARs provided interesting data. The
committee believes the Trident II D-5 and GBI all up rounds are of equal complexity except for
the flight tests, which are not separately identified in either RDT&E cost. Table E-1 compares
TABLE E-1 Comparison of GMI and Trident II Missiles
GMD Interceptor System Trident II (D-5) Missiles
RDT&E time frame 1998 to 2009a 1978 to 1993b
Interceptor AUPC (million $) 71-84c 54d
Production lot quantity 52 54
aThe GMD program started with NMD DEM/VAL for the BPI followed by GMD block development.
bThe Trident II program includes 3 years of concept definition, 3 years of advanced development, and 10 years of
full-scale development (FSD).
cMDA provided the committee with this estimate.
dThe Trident II D-5 missile AUPC cost estimates were the most recent Program Manager’s estimates to
completion (ETC) for the first weapons procurement production contracts awarded after FSD to Lockheed-Martin in
March 1984 for missiles and to Hughes Aircraft in July 1989 for the electronics packages as reported in “TRIDENT
II (D-5) SAR,” December 31, 1990. The AUPC also includes the Program Manager’s ETC for the Kearfott
Guidance contract awarded in October 1989 for guidance packages as reported in that same document.
E-3
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
the RDT&E time frame for the GMD interceptor system, its average unit procurement cost
(AUPC) in FY 2010 constant dollars, and production lot quantity like those of the Trident II D-5
missiles.
The Trident II AUPC is for an all-up round for the post-boost vehicles, stellar inertial
guidance, and test instrumentation for a first production lot quantity of 54 missiles built
immediately after FSD. The AUPC range estimate for GBIs for a total quantity of 52 missiles,
of which 30 interceptor have already been fielded and produced, 20 with the original Capability
Enhancement I (CE-I) KV and 10 with the Capability Enhancement II (CE-II) EKV. The
remaining 22 missiles are currently being funded through FY 2016.
The lower bound, or minimum AUPC estimate for producing 52 three-stage GBIs at $71
million (based on continued funding through FY 2016) is 32 percent higher than the comparable
average unit cost of 54 Trident II D-5 missiles (without the warheads) at $54 million (both in
constant FY 2010 dollars).
ASSESSMENT OF MDA ONGOING PROGRAM BUDGETS AND SOURCES OF
DISCRETIONARY FUNDS
Before describing the databases, ground rules and assumptions, and cost methods used
for generating system LCC, the effects of the committee’s proposed recommendations on
affordability concerns and the MDA current and projected annual budget ceilings through the
Future Years Defense Plan (FYDP), on the current MDA ongoing budget commitments of all the
programs of record, and on the level of discretionary funds available that could potentially be
redirected to implement changes as early as FY 2012 and the out-years.
Figure E-1 below provides a top-down breakout of the FY 2011 MDA budget for each of
the three major system acquisition phases and costs associated with LCC. The budget for testing
is separated from that for sustainment to allow comparisons with the investment budget
earmarked for development for procurement acquisition phases.
FIGURE E-1 MDA budget breakout by LCC phases. The total portfolio investment budget depicted in this figure
does not include $431 million for RDT&E funds for Pentagon Reserve and MDA management headquarters nor
does it include the MILCON budget or BRAC funds. The testing budget includes funds for Joint Warfighter
exercises and war games but does not include funds for modeling and simulation, which were considered to be part
of the development phase.
E-4
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Table E-2 below provides further breakdown of programs considered as part of
development from highest to lowest by percent of the $2.9 billion of FY 2011 funds for MDA
programs of record beginning with the Aegis and ending with PTSS. Table E-2 reflects a change
from the programs funded in FY 2010.
TABLE E-2 MDA FY-2011 Major Development Programs of Record
Ballistic Missile Defense (BMD) Programs Breakdown of Funding of Programs (%)a
Aegis 29
BMD enabling programs 14
Aegis SM-3 Block IIA codevelopment 11
Aegis ashore (SM-3 Block IIB) 9
C2BMC 9
GMD midcourse segment 6
Advanced technology 4
Airborne infrared 4
Directed energy research 3
Ground-based radars 3
Terminal segment of THAAD 3
Precision tracking and surveillance system (PTSS) 3
Other 2
NOTE: C2BMC, command and control battle management center; THAAD, Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense.
a Portion of $2.9 billion FY 2010 funds for development.
Figure E-2 displays the magnitude of the budget changes contained in the FY 2011 MDA
President’s Budget (PB) submitted in February 2010. On the top bar chart, the boost segment
airborne laser program has been terminated (denoted by the red bar). Beginning with the FY
2011 budget, the bottom bar chart (see the green bar), along three other new programs added in
the FY 2011 budget: the land-based SM-3 interceptor, ABIR, and PTSS programs.
E-5
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE E-2 MDA program budget changes from FY 2010 to FY 2011. GBI, ground-based interceptor; STSS,
space tracking and surveillance system.
Advanced Technology Programs
Of the 13 programs Table E-2 (top), at least three advanced technology programs may be
considered part of what is being defined as MDA’s discretionary budget, where the investment
does not appear to directly lead to a system procurement phase without first having to undergo a
next-step system development activity proposed by MDA and funded within the FYDP or in the
next 5-yr time frame. These three programs—BMD Enabling, Advanced Technology, and
Directed-Energy Research—comprise 21 percent, or approximately $600 million, of the total
development funds of $2.9 billion (in FY 2010 dollars).
Approximately 14 percent of the funds are for BMD Enabling programs, which are
focused on developing critical processes needed to integrate stand-alone missile defense systems
into a layered BMD system to achieve cost and operational efficiencies by improving protection
performance within increased defended areas and minimizing force structure costs.
Another 4 percent of MDA’s development budget is allocated for advanced technology
efforts as a hedge against future threat uncertainties focused on funding next-generation and
game-changing technologies with promising operationally cost-effective capabilities and
developing and demonstrating the maturity of relevant components for future BMDS
architectures.
A third development program, directed energy research, consuming 3 percent of the total
MDA development budget, is focused in the near-term on the following:
Using an aircraft test platform in flight, along with ground tests, to characterize high-
energy laser beam propagation and the effects of atmospheric (1) propagation and (2)
boundary layer and jitter with varying engagement geometries,
E-6
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Developing and experimenting with diode-pumped gas lasers, fiber lasers, solid-state
and advanced high-power laser optics,
Investigating lethality, counter-countermeasures, beam propagation, modeling, laser
beam combining, and additional innovative areas, and
Analyzing alternatives to select out-year laser investments.
Shifting MDA Budget Trends
In addition to advanced technology funds being a potential source of future discretionary
budget, the MDA continuing role in procurement of Aegis systems and material sustainment of
deployed THAAD systems in FY 2012 and the out-years, has shifted and reduced the percent of
total MDA funds earmarked from 38 percent in FY 2011 to 30 percent (proposed) in FY 2012.
As displayed in Figure E-3, FY 2012 procurement funding as a portion of the total MDA budget
is10 percent higher than in FY 2011 owing primarily to a 7.5-fold increase in the Aegis FY 2011
program budget. The FY 2012 sustainment portion of the total MDA budget is 2 percent greater
than the FY 2011 budget owing primarily to an increase in THAAD total sustainment funds,
which now list a separate O&M budget line item for this system.
FIGURE E-3 Trends in MDA investment budget portfolio (FY2011 left pie chart; FY 2012 right pie chart).
MAJOR ESTIMATING GROUND RULES AND ASSUMPTIONS
All costs in this appendix are expressed as FY 2010 dollars5.
The system LCC for each of the options considered will be displayed as “minimum” (or
5Costs were escalated to FY 2010 dollars using inflation rates listed in the Air Force Raw Inflation Indices Base
Year (FY) 2010 table by appropriation budget categories (e. g., Total Military Compensation (3500), Operations and
Maintenance (3400), RDT&E (3600), MILCON (3300), Aircraft and Missile Procurement (3010/20), Other
Procurement (3080), and Fuel. The inflation rates are based on OSD Raw Inflation Rates from December 11, 2009
and were issued by the Secretary of the Air Force/FMCEE as the OPR on January 8, 2010.
E-7
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
low) and “maximum” (or high) range estimates. For purposes of this study, the resulting LCC
estimates for the minimum or the lower bound of the range estimates represent the projected
“should cost” estimates6 are computed based primarily on the data sources and cost estimating
methods described later in this appendix.
Since the system options for improving U. S. missile defense range from new, advanced
technology, long-range alternatives to near-term, well-proven technology alternatives, the system
cost uncertainty of proposed programs and maximum, or upper bound, cost (system “will” cost)
estimates must, from a budgetary perspective, include the potential for “representative” cost
growth comparable to that of interceptors, early warning IR sensor systems, and ship and
ground-based radar systems. In addition, maximum cost “estimates for systems that are defined
only conceptually or that depend on the development of new technologies [could grow faster
than those] for well-defined programs [that are] based on proven technologies.”7 For example,
as reported by CBO and assessed by the RAND Corporation, the total development and
procurement cost growth for missiles averaged 43.9 percent for six programs. Development cost
growth was reported to 40.6 percent with procurement at 58.5 percent.8
DOD budgets for many past and current programs of record where in particular MDA
and military service funds, have already been committed as part of the FY 2011 PB submitted in
February 2010 and were waiting for approval in FY 2011. In addition, the PB budget
justification for the majority of RDT&E and procurement program budgets contains annual
projections in the FYDP through FY 2015.
For the purposes of this study and as a ground rule for estimating the cost of potential system
options for improving U. S. missile defense, there is a set of system architecture baseline systems
and programs of record that are operational and undergoing testing and demonstration, already
fielded, or close to providing initial operational capability (IOC) before the end of the FY 2011
FYDP in FY 2015. Since the past annual funds through the approval of FY 2011 budget have
already been expended or soon committed for these programs of record, the committee
considered this portion of the LCC of the following systems as sunk cost and did not include
them in their estimates.
KEY BALLISTIC MISSILE BENCHMARK DATA SOURCES
To the greatest extent possible and where the systems were technically similar to previous
systems, development and production cost estimates were based on adjusting analogous costs
from data from (1) historical programs of record supplied by MDA, (2) detailed breakout of
6The “should” cost” and the “will” cost estimates are terms commonly used by the OSD CAPE office. “Should”
cost estimates are most likely generated by program offices and will include additional contingency costs to account
for the inherent uncertainty in the cost-estimating methods used and for mitigating known system-specific risks
(e. g., requirements creep, program budget changes, and schedule slips).
7Congressional Budget Office. 2004. Alternatives for Boost-Phase Missile Defense, Washington, D. C., July.
8For most components, the cost-risk factors that CBO used were developed by the RAND Corporation and were
based on published updates reported in Joseph G. Bolten, Robert S. Leonard, Mark V. Arena, Obaid Younossi, and
Jerry M. Sollinger, 2008, Sources of Weapon System Cost Growth Analysis of 35 Major Defense: Acquisition
Programs, MG-670-AF, Santa Monica, Calif. Total development and procurement cost growth for missiles
averaged 43.9 percent for six programs. Development cost growth was reported at 40.6 percent, with the 17.5
percent of the 40.6 percent due to requirements changes, another 4.6 percent due to schedule changes, and the
majority of the remainder of 15.2 percent due to cost estimating errors. The procurement cost growth average of
58.5 percent included 13.1 percent for requirements changes, 15.5 percent for schedule changes, and 5.5 percent for
quantity changes with most of the remainder of 13.9 percent due to cost estimating errors.
E-8
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
funds identified in past fiscal year budget justification sheets, and (3) open source contract award
prices as documented in Defense Links.
Table E-3 below is a representative reference list of MDA interceptors we used as the key
reference data we used for generating our LCC range estimates along with key cost details listed
in tables that follow later in this section along with representative sets of parametric data values
collected for each.
TABLE E-3 Representative Sources of Cost Data
Development (Non- Production
Interceptor Systems Recurring Cost) (Recurring Unit Cost Annual O&S Cost MILCON Cost
GMD systemsa
GBI NMD and GBI and Booster stacks (2 vs. Total GMD system Missile fields,
test details 3 stage), booster MDA, contractor utilities and
avionics module and MILPERS mechanical/electrical
(BAM), EKV, sustainment costs buildings
IA&T, long-lead and unscheduled and
parts scheduled
Silos Part of NMD total Missile field 2 maintenance costs Silo ground
estimates, allocated per GBI infrastructure
on per silo cost basis
IFICS data terminal Part of NMD total FGA configuration Yes
Ground fire control Part of NMD total Common to FGA N/A
and MDIOC
Aegisb
BMD 3.6.1
SM-3 Block IA Combined total Yes Per missile N/A
Ship system (AWS) Total only including Per AWS N/A
installation cost
BMD 5.1
SM-3 Block IB Separate total Yes Per missile N/A
Ship system (AWS) Separate total Total only including Per AWS N/A
installation cost
BMD 5.1
SM-3 Block IIA Separate total N/A TBD N/A
Ship system (AWS) Separate total Total only including TBD N/A
installation cost
THAADc
System Captured in RDT&E Total procurement Beginning in FY N/A
budget documents cost only (includes 2011, annual O&S
PSE, systems cost per THAAD
integration, GSE and battery split between
CFE MDA and Army
Interceptors Part of system total Yes O&M and N/A
TFOC Part of system total Yes MILPERS budgetsd N/A
Launchers Part of system total Yes N/A
PAC-3 MDA and Army RDT&E and procurement budgets and latest N/A
selected acquisition report
NOTE: MDIOC, Missile Defense Integrated Operations Center; NMD, National Missile Defense; EKV,
exoatmospheric kill vehicle; GBI, ground-based interceptor; IA&T, assembling, integrating, and testing; GSE,
general support equipment; CFE, contractor furnished equipment; PSE, particular support equipment; O&S,
operation and support; TFCC, THAAD Fire Control and Communications; AWS, Aegis weapon system.
a Benchmark cost for sea-based and ground-based X-band radar covered separately.
b Benchmark cost for SPY-1 radar covered separately.
c Benchmark cost for terminal-based TPY-2 radar covered separately.
E-9
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
dTHAAD O&S annual costs are divided between MDA PTSS, sustaining support, government-furnished
equipment (GFE) and support equipment modifications and logistics support of the interceptors, TFCC, and
launchers. The Army O&S costs are comprised of POL, GFE spares, repair parts and depot maintenance and d
indirect support.
ESTIMATING METHODS
Overview
The best estimating methods were selected based on compilation from one of the
following:
Analogous systems with comparable performance and/or technical parametric values
or
Cost models based on factors ranging from weight and power costs to statistically
derived cost estimating relationships (CERs).
Cost models with sets of CERs were preferred; they were selected based on a set of
technical parameters that best depicted and aligned with the logical set of cost drivers that
directly impact the magnitude of the booster and propulsion missile system costs, missile IR
seekers, ground radars, airborne and space-based EO/IR/FMV sensors, space launchers, cost per
kilogram trends, and so on. In addition as part of the set of estimating methods, the committee
used cost models that quantified cost sensitivity—in, for example, estimating space-based
interceptors vs. ground-based interceptors and differences between airborne and space-based IR
sensors.
Development Costs
In general, the primary approach used in estimating the rough order of magnitude of
development costs was based on an analogous method where feasible. This approach relied on
parametric cost models when needed or on a cross-check to ensure the overall reasonableness of
the estimates. The parametric cost estimates used for both development and production cost
estimates is summarized in Table E-4 below.
The analogous estimates were computed using historical costs from comparable systems
and escalating them to FY 2010 constant year dollars. The costs were then adjusted based on
applying an aggregate set of complexity factors primarily driven by a top-down subsystem, and
estimates might be lower because of the extent to which the new system could leverage the
technical design, engineering, and manufacturing heritage. The heritage assessments were
expressed in terms of technology readiness levels (TRLs) or manufacturing readiness levels
(MRLs), widely used indexes of maturity.9
9William L. Nolte, USAF Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), Sensors Directorate. 2007. Hardware and
Software Transition Readiness Level Calculator, Version 2.2, March 9. Available at
www. acq. osd. mil/jctd/TRL/TRL%20Calc%20Ver%202_2. Accessed August 28, 2012. See also William L. Nolte,
USAF AFRL, Sensors Directorate, 2002, AFRL Technology Readiness Calculator, October. Available at
www. dtic. mil/ndia/2003systems/nolte2. pdf. Accessed August 28, 2012.
E-10
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-4 Summary of Parametric Cost Models
System or Subsystem Parametric Cost Models
Interceptor stages Basic rocket equations
Propulsion subsystems Tecolote launch vehicle cost model
NASA Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) Launch Vehicle Cost Modela
IR seekers Galorath SEER-hardware and electro-optical systems (EOS)b
Airborne platforms RAND DAPCA modelc
Space-based platforms Tecolote unmanned spacecraft cost model (USCM)d
Aerospace small satellite cost model (SSCM)e
Radar Technomics ground-based radar cost modelf
Electro-optical sensors Galorath SEER-hardware and electro-optical systems (EOS)b
Launch service costs American Institute of Aeronautical Engineers (AIAA) International Launch
Vehicle Systems Handbook, 4th editiong
a Tecolote Research, Inc. 1996. NASA MSFC, Launch Vehicle Cost Model, PRC Service, CR-0734, August 23.
CERs for solid rocket motor, and liquid rocket engines, solid fuel systems, and so on.
b Galorath SEER-electro-optics (EO) parametric cost model.
cRAND Corporation, DAPCA aircraft cost model.
dUSAF Unmanned Spacecraft Cost Model, eighth edition.
e Aerospace Corporation, 2002, Small Satellite Cost Model (SSCM).
f Technomics ground-based radar cost model; CERs taken from J. Horak, J. Harbor, and C. Holcomb, “Integrating
Performance and Schedule Analysis with Acquisition Costing for Ground-Based Radars,” presentation to the
committee, February 18, 2010.
gAIAA, 2003.
Production Costs
In general, the total production cost of each interceptor is calculated by estimating the
first unit cost of each major component of the system and then by estimating the cost of
assembling, integrating, and testing (AI&T) those components into the first interceptor off the
production line. The components include the booster stage(s), avionics (electronic
communications and navigation systems), the KV, and, for mobile interceptors, the launch
canister. Unless there was a comparable early warning IR sensor, radar, or interceptor with
known unit production cost details, the costs of the majority of the relatively new systems cost
were based on system, subsystem, or lower level CERs from the parametric cost models listed in
the above table.
Specifically, the booster portion of the interceptor costs that were not part of the MDA
programs of record were estimated using a CER based on the total impulse (thrust multiplied by
burn time) of each stage of a booster and other technical parameters to calculate the cost of the
first production model of the booster. Costs for the booster’s avionics and KV’s avionics, divert
attitude control system (DACS), thrusters and other hardware were estimated with the Air Force
Unmanned Spacecraft Cost Model (USCM). USCM uses CERs based on the mass of various
components. In addition, the space-based interceptor satellite configured with a lifejacket was
estimated using USCM at the subsystem level.
“Wrap” factor percentage values were also applied for estimating the costs of IA&T for
components, subsystems, or systems by adding the costs and applying a percent value to the total
cost of an interceptor. Where applicable, a wrap factor percentage was also applied for
estimating the cost of government systems engineering and project management (SEPM), which
would add another 30 percent. The percentages and values applied in the roll-up of an
interceptor (as well as other sensor system costs) are consistent with CERs most commonly used
for such work.
E-11
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
As in the 2004 CBO report, “costs for the [remaining new] interceptors that would be
purchased under each option were estimated by analyzing trends in actual costs for the ground-
based” interceptors that MDA has recently purchased.10 The average unit procurement costs
computed for multiple interceptors reflects the impact of total manufacturing labor hours and of
cost efficiencies of discounts on material quantities on the cost of the first interceptor or other
system firsts. Costs would decrease as a function of the quantity produced within an assumed
continuous single manufacturing run or of the inefficiencies of reopening and restarting a
manufacturing line to procure more replacement interceptors. The estimate of unit production
cost of additional interceptors is based on the learning curve, or cost improvement curve (CIC),
or on a slope of the historical unit production cost of analogous interceptors as a function of
quantity produced.11 Details are provided in the next section of this appendix of the computed
unit production cost for Aegis SM-3 Block IA and THAAD interceptors.
Sustainment Costs
Except for space-based interceptors (SBIs), the majority of the sustainment cost estimates
are based on average annual O&S system costs provided by MDA program offices. As needed
and for completeness, the average annual O&S costs for systems already delivered and fielded
were cross-checked against the total MDA and services (i. e., Navy for Aegis and Army for
Patriot) O&M system program budgets and portions of the RDT&E program budget justification
sheets where material sustainment-related activities and associated funds were clearly identified.
For SBIs, the sustainment costs were based on assuming an average on-orbit life for each SBI
satellite of 7 years and included procurement replacements and launch costs to maintain full
operational capability (FOC) over the 20-yr service life. The annual operating costs for ground
mission control were based on previously estimated costs from the 2004 CBO report escalated to
FY 2010 dollars.12
LIFE CYCLE COST DETAILS ON MDA NEW SYSTEMS
Aegis SM-3 Block IIA and Aegis Ashore Systems
In the FY 2012 PB MDA is currently requesting an RDT&E total budget of $2.7 billion
through FY 2016 (in FY 2010 constant dollars) for the SM-3 Block IIA interceptor system and
the Aegis Ashore programs of record and another $350 million for the procurement of the first
15 Block IIA interceptors, with first delivery expected in FY 2019. Projecting forward, the
committee estimated 20-yr LCC that includes the requested budget to account for the potential
deployment of these latest Aegis interceptors at both ship-based locations in the Persian Gulf and
at land-based European or Middle East sites.
Table E-5 lists the total 20-yr LCC estimates for improved ship-based and land-based
Aegis SM-3 Block IIA interceptors.
10Congressional Budget Office. 2004. Alternatives for Boost-Phase Missile Defense, Washington, D. C., July.
11The learning curve, or CIC slope, value of, for example, 95 percent, quantifies the cost reduction associated with
doubling the number of interceptors being purchased and reduces the average unit cost of the lot buy of interceptors
by about 5 percent.
12Congressional Budget Office. 2004. Alternatives for Boost-Phase Missile Defense, July.
E-12
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-5 Improved Aegis SM-3 Block IIA Interceptor System LCC Estimates (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 2.0 3.0
Procurement See above See above
Force quantity buyb Projected SM-3 Block IIA, quantity = 56 (mix of either two dedicated Aegis
ships or two land-based sites)
MILCON 0.10 0.10
20-yr O&Sc 3.9 4.4
Total 6.0 7.5
a Based on the MDA FY 2012 FYDP RDT&E PM SM-3 Block IIA codevelopment and Aegis Ashore program
budgets from FY 2010 through FY 2016. The development cost also includes the delivery of 29 SM-3 Block IIA
interceptors covered as part of the RDT&E interceptor co-development program budget through FY 2016 and an
additional procurement budget buy of 15 SM-3 Block IIA interceptors. The average unit cost of the SM-3 Block
IIA missile round was listed in FY 2014 at $24.3 million.
bThe procurement cost included in the development estimate is based on a force quantity buy of 48 operational
SM-3 Block IIA missiles and an addition 8 test interceptors.
cThe SM-3 Block IIA system O&S estimates are based on continuous operational readiness of 48 SM-3 Block IIA
interceptors on a mix of two dedicated Aegis ships in either the Persian Gulf or at two Middle East fixed land sites
with 24 operational missiles plus test interceptors at each location, all over a 20-yr sustainment period.
In addition to these sites with large coverage capability against Iranian IRBM/MRBM
threats, a number of THAAD and/or PAC-3 batteries will also be needed for close-in defense
against SRBMs near the forward perimeter of the defended zones. The 20-yr LCC summary
estimates for these two systems are provided later in this appendix in the subsection after next for
THAAD and for Army PAC-3/MSE Systems.
Aegis SM-3 Block IIB
MDA is requesting in the FY 2012 PB an RDT&E total budget of $1.6 billion through
FY 2016 (in FY 2010 constant dollars) for the SM-3 Block IIB interceptor system program of
record. Since the SM-3 Block IIB program beginning in FY 2011 is in an early technology
development phase, MDA has awarded three contracts with potential prime contractors to define
missile concepts, assess technology risk, and complete system-level trade studies in preparation
for the product development phase, which is not scheduled to begin until FY 2013.
Even though previous performance interceptor funding combined with the propulsion
technology content were used for the SM-3 Block IIB new program of record, it is too early in
the acquisition to determine if the design baseline will focus on maturing the key component
technologies to TRL values of 5 or 6 for increasing the speed of the missile (using lighter weight
structures and materials to reduce inert mass) and ensuring the flexible energy management
needed to effectively engage targeted ballistic missiles early in their trajectory. Other
opportunities in the design trade space could include investments in advanced seeker
technologies to increase KV acquisition range thus improving threat missile containment.
The engineering trade space includes alternative configurations for the booster to enable
higher burnout velocities; larger diameter missiles and resulting modifications to the MK41 VLS
launcher, rocket propellants, missile structures, control mechanisms, and missile communication
concepts to enable communication with multiple sensors over several frequencies; kinetic
warhead seeker and the kinetic warhead DACS. Another key aspect of the trade studies and
technology development is to analyze and define a larger canister and missile threat that is
compatible with the MK 41 launcher used on Aegis ships to ensure compatibility with Aegis
Ashore and Afloat. This comprehensive strategy of technology investments to reduce risk,
E-13
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
exploit technology opportunities, and engage industry early will provide the foundation for
executable plans for the product development phase.
Given the current consideration of several land-based SM-3 Block IIB interceptor designs
within the solution space from the original SM-3 Block IIB designs and projecting forward to a
higher performance next-generation Aegis missile system (NGAMS), the committee estimated
20-yr LCC ranges to account for the technical risk and cost uncertainty in potential deployment
of these latest AEGIS interceptors at land-based European sites.
Table E-6 lists the 20-yr LCC estimates for land-based SM-3 Block IIB interceptor
systems for one dedicated European fixed site.
TABLE E-6 Land-Based SM-3 Block IIB System 20-Yr LCC Estimates (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 5.3 13.7
Procurement See above See above
Force quantity buyb Projected SM-3 Block IIB, quantity = 28 (one dedicated European land site)
MILCONc 0.10 0.10
20-yr O&S 3.8 5.5
Total 9.2 19.25
aThe total development cost is based on total MDA FY 2012 RDT&E PB budget from FY 2011 through FY 2016
requested for the (1) land-based SM-3 Block IIB program, (2) BMD advanced technology development funds that
were transferred to this program beginning in FY 2012, and (3) additional projected cost the committee estimated
for extending the development phase for the lower bound, or minimum, total cost to FY 2019 and the upper bound,
or maximum, total cost with the development program extended to FY 2021 and beyond.
bThe procurement cost included in the development estimate is for a total force buy quantity for defending U. S.
and European allies and U. S. deployed forces from an Iranian ballistic missile attack based on a total buy quantity of
28 SM-3 Block IIB missiles: 24 operational missiles and 4 test interceptors, ground-based launchers, fire control
units, and C2BMC terminals at a single dedicated European land-based site.
cThe MILCON cost is based on the MDA FY 2012 PB MILCON budget requested for the construction cost of a
land-based SM-3 launch facility in the FY 2013 time frame.
Total SM-3 Blk IIB interceptor system O&S estimates are based on the costs for
continuous operation readiness, testing and sustainment at one land-based European site for
maintaining the 24 operational missiles and remaining test assets over a 20-yr period.
ABIR Systems
Life Cycle Cost Summary
A summary of the 20-yr LCC range estimate for the ABIR system is summarized in Table E-
7.
TABLE E-7 ABIR System Total LCC Estimate (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 1.4 1.9
Procurementb 0.3 0.7
Force quantity buyc Three 24/7 CAPs of 3 + 1 spare or four mission-capable Reapers and a ground station
per CAP
Total inventory of 12 vehicles for a Total inventory of 17 vehicles for a
notional annual use of up to 90 days per yr surge demand of up to 270 days per yr
MILCON 0.03 0.06
20-yr O&Sc 2.6 2.8
Total 20-yr LCC estimate 4.2 5.4
NOTE: CAP, combat air patrol.
E-14
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
aThe development cost estimate of between $ 1. 4 billion and $ 1. 9 billion is based on the MDA total investment in
the ABIR program from FY 2011 through FY 2016 of $ 342 million as stated in the MDA FY 2012 FYDP and
projected forward for another 9 to 14 years from FY 2023 through FY-2030 to complete EMD through full
operational testing and continuing until go-ahead into the production phase. ( Of the $ 342 million in ABIR program
budget through FY 2016, $ 312 million is for the RDT&E development program and $ 30 million is MILCON budget
for the construction of an ABIR facility in FY 2014. )
In addition, the development range estimates includes the cost of designing, integrating, and testing five fully
configured flight test articles at a lower bound, or minimum, average unit procurement cost ( AUPC ) of $ 21. 5
million for Reaper MQ-9Bs configured with an as-designed MTS-B sensor coming off the production line or at an
upper bound, or maximum, AUPC of $ 24. 5 million for a slightly modified MTS-B. The range for each ABIR
system flight test article also includes an onboard processor and communications link to the C2BMC needed for
satisfying and demonstrating the unique missile tracking performance required for the ABIR mission. The
committee also estimated the AUPC of five sets of Reaper MQ-9 ground systems at $ 10 million each ( in FY 2010
dollars ) to be delivered along with airborne vehicles during the development phase. ( Each Reaper ground system
includes the procurement of hardware for the Reaper launch and recovery element for landings and takeoffs and the
mission control station ( MCS ) for operating the vehicles once at cruise altitude and in on-station CAP orbits. The
MCS includes the hardware and software interfaces to enable Reaper’s ground operators to monitor the health and
status of the airborne C2BM communications downlinks and ensure the integrity and timely transmission of the
airborne IR sensor missile tracking data that is being routed to the nearest C2BMC and the designated interceptor’s
fire control radar. )
bFor the follow-on production phase in FY 2023 to FY 2030, the procurement cost range estimate of between
$ 300 million and $ 700 million is based on an ABIR system AUPC range for the force-level quantity of between 12
and 17 airborne systems. The committee based its procurement minimum cost estimate for an ABIR sensor AUPC
integrated on a Reaper MQ-9B airborne vehicle configured with a modified MTS-B sensor at a lower bound, or
minimum, AUPC estimated at $ 21. 4 million for a lower bound force size of 12 airborne systems. The committee
based the procurement maximum cost estimate for the same ABIR sensor AUPC integrated on a Reaper MQ-9B
airborne vehicle configured with a notional repackaged, smaller, lighter, reduced-power-version of the pod-mounted
Heimdall sensor as an alternative candidate IR sensor, also integrated on a Reaper MQ-9 airborne vehicle with a
minimum AUPC estimate of $ 37. 9 million for a higher force-level quantity of 17 systems. ( The modified Heimdall
sensor unit cost is based on a further weight, volume, and power reduction over the envisioned modifications needed
for the Global Hawk RQ-4B. Further details on the earlier use of the Heimdall sensor and the basis for the modified
version of this sensor are provided in a previous section of this appendix, “Aegis SM-3 Block IIA and Aegis Ashore
Systems. ” ) Finally, the procurement cost also includes three ground systems at $ 10 million each required for
operating three CAPs at separate outside the continental United States ( OCONUS ) forward-deployed bases.
cThe 20-yr O&S cost range estimate represents the steady-state annual O&S costs on a per CAP basis for
operating and sustaining the ABIR systems and the ground segment operations centers out of a forward-deployed
OCONUS base across the range of a force size inventory of up to ( 1 ) 12 systems for an average annual surge of
CAP operations for 90 days, estimated at an annual cost of approximately $ 42 million per CAP, and ( 2 ) up to 17
systems for a higher annual surge of CAP operations for 270 days, estimated at an annual cost of approximately $ 47
million per CAP.
The basis for the forward-base locations, time to station, and other details used to compute the number of ABIR -
configured Reapers to sustain a 24/7 CAP and the total force inventory quantity range of ABIR-configured Reapers
needed for nominal and surge demand conditions are provided later in this section.
Previous Relevant Investments
As part of the potentially relevant ( and technically relevant ) proof-of-concept investment
activities that preceded MDA submitting a budget for FY 2011 budget through FY 2015 for the
new start ABIR program in February 2010, MDA has an on-going Airborne Sensor ( ABS )
program. ” The ABS program issued a request to industry in May 2009 for going forward with a
5-yr effort to continue “operation and sustainment of the MDA airborne sensors and platforms
E-15
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
used to support the BMDS test program.13 At that time, the contractor that won the award would
“be required to perform mission operations, aircraft test operations, and aircraft maintenance [on
four] airborne sensor systems currently operated by MDA[:] the High Altitude Observatories
(HALO I, II, and III) and the Wide-body Airborne Sensor Platform (WASP) aircraft....
The HALO I is a Gulfstream IIB aircraft with multiple sensors viewing through optical
windows, used for data collection in the visible through long-wave IR (LWIR) spectral regions.
Four sensor stations accommodate a mix of user-defined sensors in three gimbaled-mirror
pointed platforms and one fixed-mirror pointed platform. HALO II is also a Gulfstream IIB
aircraft with a cupola mounted atop the fuselage that allows for open port viewing with a
multiband sensor system to collect radiometric and photo documentation data in the visible
through LWIR spectral regions. HALO II also allows for window viewing by cabin sensors.
HALO III is a Gulfstream IISP aircraft that serves as the airborne diagnostic target (ADT) for the
Airborne Laser program. It includes a wing-mounted sensor pod, plume emulator, target board,
various beacon lasers, and ADT system control and situational awareness hardware. WASP is a
DC-10 aircraft modified with three pressure vessels to allow open port or closed cabin optical
window sensor viewing. WASP will accommodate a prime sensor system (PSS) for data
collection and guest captive-carry seeker/sensor systems. The WASP PSS is similar in design
and capability to the HALO-II primary sensor.”14
Furthermore, as a precursor to the ABIR program, the ABS program’s industry
solicitation also stated that “as future requirements emerge, MDA may add additional aircraft,
additional sensors, develop new sensor systems, and/or modify sensor/mission support systems
onboard the current [MDA] aircraft.... [MDA stated that] the intended outcome of this
[solicitation was] to [both] “determine interest and capability” in supporting the ABS program
and to identify acquisition alternatives that may warrant further study and review.”15
In going forward and as part of its justification for the ABIR budget, MDA stated that in
order “to address the looming threat of regional forces in large numbers, [it had] aligned [its]
technology investments with [the objective of uncovering] gaps in [the] ability to (1) address
large raid sizes and( 2) intercept the enemy early in [its] trajectory [and] when the enemy is most
vulnerable[:] assess[,] then reengage if necessary.”16
In addition, to potentially leverage the relevant airborne IR and optics technology from
the ABS program, MDA had prior to February 2010 “demonstrated the ability of IR sensors
carried aboard Navy Reaper unmanned aerial systems to observe ballistic missiles in-flight at
long distance during the `Stellar Daggers` test in Hawaii and the Delta II launch in California.
The impressive results of these tests lead [MDA] to believe that airborne sensors can be an
effective component of the Ballistic Missile Defense System as early as 2015.”17
Going forward, the MDA total investment in the ABIR program, $477.1 million (FY
2010 dollars) reflects the average annual budget, $95.4 million (FY 2010 dollars), for the
technology development effort to prove the airborne sensor capabilities and allow the operational
13Airborne Sensor Program (ABS) Sources Sought, FBO Daily, May 22, 2009, FBO #2734, Notice date May 20,
2009, available at http://www. fbodaily. com/archive/2009/05-May/22-May-2009/FBO-01824078. htm. Accessed
June 14, 2012.
14Ibid.
15Ibid.
16As reported in MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit
R-2, RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0604884C: Airborne Infrared (ABIR), February 2010.
17Ibid.
E-16
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
assessment and proof of capability needed to detect ballistic targets and achieve early intercepts
by conducting a series of ground and flight tests through FY 2012. Specifically, MDA stated
that “these demonstrations [will] incrementally prove the key functions of an airborne infrared
sensor:
Acquisition of a threat based on a cue from overhead persistent infrared satellites;
Tracking of a threat throughout its flight;
Generation of a two-dimensional track prediction of the threat`s flight path based on a
single airborne sensor;
Fusing multiple two-dimensional tracks into a three-dimensional track with sufficient
accuracy to launch an interceptor; and
Delivering this information through the C2BMC system to the shooter....
In FY 2010, [MDA] began assessing platform and sensor alternatives with MIT`s Lincoln
Laboratory and partners at the Joint Integrated Air and Missile Defense Organization. This
effort [pointed] the way to the [airborne] vehicle most suited to fill this role among a group of
candidates including the currently deployed MQ-9 Reaper and the RQ-4 Global Hawk. At the
same time, [MDA] [engaged the] Joint Forces Command and the COCOMs to develop a concept
of operations for adding this mission to the [DOD’s] unmanned aerial systems fleet.”18 The
alternatives for the most likely platform and sensor combination were based on a cost-
effectiveness assessment of the sensor’s performance, target auto tracking, and raid handling
capacity and on the airborne systems’ secure communications data link capability to accurately
transmit IR sensor data with low enough latency to enable C2BMC and BMDS interceptors to
complete ballistic missile engagements.
Plans going forward include “computer-in-the-loop to hardware-in-the-loop experiments
to incrementally verify and validate [the] functionality [of the airborne sensor’s effective field of
regard. According to MDA,] these experiments [will] culminate in Aegis intercept flight tests
using primarily airborne sensors for fire control at the Pacific Missile Range Facility in Hawaii
[planned for] the summer of 2012. This testing, interspersed with regular campaigns in theater,
[leads] to [MDA’s plans for] an operationally useful architecture as early as [FY] 2015.”19
As far as estimating the recurring unit costs of the airborne platform and IR sensor mix
system quantities, the planned schedule reported in the FY 2011 MDA ABIR program budget of
February 2010, called for the first delivery of platform and ground station in the third quarter of
FY 2011, followed by four other platforms and ground stations in 1-yr increments through FY
2015. MDA planned on modifying the first and second long lead in the first and fourth quarters
of FY 2011. Since the program was to start in the first quarter of FY 2011, the committee
assumes these airborne IR sensors are most likely MTS-B sensors already in production or a
modified version of the MTS-B sensor. For estimating purposes, two other near-term key
milestones are the launch of an ABIR system for performing an airborne sensor risk reduction
demonstration, set for the third quarter of FY 2012, and plans for an acquisition procurement
milestone decision by the second quarter of FY 2012 to procure operational assets for fielding in
FY 2015.
18As reported in MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit
R-2, RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0604884C: Airborne Infrared (ABIR), February 2010.
19Ibid.
E-17
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
MDA Force-Level Quantities
For the purposes of estimating a recurring cost range for a representative unit during the
procurement phase, the committee assumed a total MDA force-level quantity of at least 12 and a
maximum of 17 airborne systems and the necessary three sets of ground stations that would be
capable of sustaining eight mission-capable systems or primary authorized aircraft (PAA)
operationally available for providing persistent 24/7 missile tracking coverage of up to three
CAPs or one system per CAP. Each CAP and the two or three requisite PAA-designated
systems are capable of being prepositioned and/or forward-deployed well in advance of the
threat at OCONUS military bases located within a reasonable operating system range of the
expected area of regard and within the effective range of the IR sensor for performing the missile
tracking mission. The total force-level quantity also includes the procurement of three spares or
backup inventory (BAI)-designated systems that are available as needed and colocated with each
of the other PAA systems at one of the three OCONUS bases. The BAI-assigned ABIR systems
are configured with the same airborne IR sensor as the PAA aircraft and are needed to maintain
persistent operational coverage and used for replacing PAA-designated systems either in transit
from the CAP back to the forward-deployed squadron or not operationally available until field
maintenance is completed. Finally, based on a notional surge capability of three continuous
CAPs on station for between 90 days and 270 days per year, the minimum and maximum range
estimates of the total force-level quantity of ABIR systems is also based on procuring anywhere
from one to six additional aircraft designated as attrition reserve inventory and needed to replace
PAA systems due to operational attrition or other accidents, assuming, on average, the loss of
two systems every 100,000 flight hours, where an in-flight accident occurred and/or the system
was declared inoperable and too expensive to repair.
Table E-8 provides the ABIR system force-level quantity range estimates based on an
average cruise speed of 175 mph at 40,000 ft and an average operational endurance of 24 flight
hours per sortie.
System Acquisition Costs
Table E-9 summarizes the committee’s estimate of the ABIR System T1 recurring cost of
the first of five airborne systems used during the development phase through FY 2015 for flight
testing demonstrations and the projected cumulative average recurring unit costs for the
procurement phase. The committee assumed that after FY 2015 the five flight test systems used
during the development phase would end up being colocated at existing CONUS-based military
test and training bases and used as test bed platforms for flight testing upgrades to an improved
version of the MTS-B sensor and/or as a new, possibly more capable IR sensor for performing
ballistic missile tracking missions on the Reapers acquired during the production phase.
For both the development and the procurement phase, the committed estimated the
AUPC of the five flight article systems and the production quantity of between 12 and 17 ABIR
systems based on Reaper MQ-9 unmanned aircraft configured with avionics, flight controls, and
without mission payload hardware, as the preferred airborne platform.
For the 5-yr development phase currently funded in the FY 2011 budget through FY
2015, the committee estimated the IR sensor AUPC based of the first sensor delivered for the
first Reaper to be an as-designed MTS-B sensor coming off the production line with a
combination of either additional MTS-B sensors procured for the other four flight test airborne
vehicles or a slightly modified version of the MTS-B designed to more closely satisfy and
E-18
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-8 Projected Force-Level Quantities for ABIR Systems
Force-Size Parameters Reaper MQ-9
Representative distance base to CAP (mi) 621.4
Cruise speed (mph) 175
Notional endurance (hr) 32.0
One-way transit to fly-out and back (hr) 7.2
Time on station (hr) 24.8
Total flight hours per sortie 32.0
Sorties per day per CAP 1.0
Number of CAP forward-operating base locations 3
Total sorties per day 3
Sorties per day per aircraft 1
Total number of PAA-designated aircraft employed 3
BAI-designated aircraft per location 1
Minimum total force size of ABIR systems (assumes no attrition 6
Force flight hours per day (three CAPS) 72
Case 1: 90-day continuous three CAPS operation
Total annual flight hours for 90-day surge 2,160
Average annual PAA-designated flight hours per aircraft per year 360
Attrition rate per 100,000 flight hours 2.0
Life-cycle flight hours (over assumed 15-yr service life) 32,400
Number of attrition reserve for 90-day surge (over 15 yr) 1
BAI-designated aircraft 3
Minimum total force size (with attrition) 10
Case 2: 270-day continuous three CAPs operation
Total annual flight hours for 270-day surge 19,440
Average annual PAA-designated flight hours per aircraft per year 3,240
Attrition rate per 100,000 flight hours 2.0
Life-cycle flight hours (over assumed 15-yr service life) 291,600
Number of attrition reserve for 270-day surge (over 15 yr) 6
BAI-designated aircraft 3
Maximum total force size (with attrition) 15
TABLE E-9 ABIR System AUPC Estimate During the Development Phase (FY 2010 million $)
ABIR System T1 Estimate
Reaper MQ-9 unit flyaway price 15.2
MTS-B sensor unit cost 0.9
Onboard mission processor and BLOS C2BMC 0.4
System AI&T (30 percent factor 5.0
Total ABIR T1 cost 21.5
demonstrate the unique missile tracking performance needed for the ABIR mission. In addition,
the costs for adding an onboard mission processor and C2MB communications to the Reaper
MQ-9 are also included along with AI&T of each ABIR system.
For the follow-on production phase beginning after FY 2015, Table E-10 lists the ABIR
AUPC range estimate for the force-level quantity of between 12 and 17 airborne systems. The
committee based its range estimate of the ABIR sensor average unit cost on a modified MTS-B
sensor as a lower bound for the lower bound force size of 12 airborne systems. As an upper
bound recurring cost and as a potential hedging strategy for meeting the expected missile
tracking requirements, the committee estimated the unit recurring cost of a notional repackaged
E-19
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-10 ABIR System AUPC Estimate During the Production Phase (FY 2010 million $)
ABIR System AUPC Estimate
Low (Quantity = 12) High (Quantity = 17)
Reaper MQ-9 unit flyaway pricea 15.2 15.2
Modified MTS-B sensor unit costb 1.2
Modified Heimdall sensor unit costc 11.8
Onboard mission processor and BLOS C2BMC 0.1 0.1
System AI&T (30 to 40 percent factord 4.9 10.8
Total ABIR AUPC cost 21.4 37.9
aIn the FY 2011 through FY 2015 time frame, the Reaper MQ-9 unit fly-away price is based on the assumption
that MDA will be able to procure the as-is designed green aircraft off the contractor’s manufacturing line fully
configured with the flight controls, avionics, and other equipment to flight qualify the system. The price also
included the communication system links for operating the unmanned vehicle through ground operators at the
launch and recovery unit and the missions control station and also for transmitting the IR sensor data through
MDA’s C2BMC and on to a designated interceptor’s fire control radar. After FY 2015 MDA will be procuring
identically configured Reapers coming off a mature, continuous production line, where it assumed the learning or
cost improvement factor is relatively flat and affords relatively small savings per system as the total quantity
manufactured increases.
bThe modified MTS-B sensor is based on a more complex design than the MTS-B, that provides additional IR
capability to meet the mission-unique requirements for performing the missile tracking mission.
cThe modified Heimdall sensor unit cost is based on a further weight, volume and power reduction over the
envisioned modifications needed for the Global Hawk RQ-4B. ABIR system analysis alternatives performed for
MDA indicated that the Heimdall sensor suite and real-time signal processors onboard the HALO II aircraft can be
transplanted to fit within a configured green aircraft version of the Global Hawk RQ-4B without any other mission
equipment. However, the RQ-4B airframe must be able to accommodate the weight load of the pod and the
necessary onboard electronics. Given the existing RQ-4B onboard power and air cooling and further modifications
needed, the total weight load on the RQ-4B of a pod-modified Heimdall sensor was estimated at between 2,000 lb
and 2,800 lb, with more than 700 lb of this weight attributable to the optical sensor, the platform, and the mission
equipment suite itself.
dThe factor for IA&T for the Heimdall IR sensor is higher, 40 percent, than that for the modified MTS-B sensor
reflects because the recurring costs of electrical and mechanical interfaces to install this heavier sensor and still meet
the platform’s center of gravity and reduced drag requirements will be higher.
and smaller, lighter, and reduced-power version of the pod-mounted Heimdall sensor (compared
to the option MDA had considered as a candidate IR sensor for the Global Hawk RQ-4B). (The
full-scale Heimdall sensor was originally designed for and is currently being used on the HALO
II manned ABS testbed aircraft.) It should be noted that this upper bound, higher ABIR system
recurring cost estimate would most likely require additional development funds to cover the cost
for modifying the Reaper airframe to carry the load of the larger pod-mounted IR sensor and still
meet the aerodynamic performance and required high endurance of the vehicle. The upper
bound estimate is also based on the higher force-level quantity of 17 systems.
The committee also estimated the average unit cost of five sets of Reaper MQ-9 ground
systems at $10 million each (FY 2010 dollars) to be delivered along with airborne vehicles
during the development phase. Since this procurement relies primarily on off-the-shelf computer
workstations, processors, and communication equipment, the committee estimated the cost of
operating three CAPS at separate OCONUS forward-deployed bases would remain at $10
million each for the procurement of three ground systems required during the production phase.
Each ground system requires the procurement of hardware for the Reaper launch and recovery
element (LRE) for landings and takeoffs and for the mission control station (MCS) for operating
the vehicles once at cruise altitude and for on-station CAP orbits. The MCS includes the
hardware and software interfaces to enable Reapers’ ground operators to monitor the health and
E-20
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
status of the airborne C2BMC downlinks and to ensure the integrity and timely transmission of
the airborne IR sensor missile tracking data to the nearest C2BMC and the designated
interceptor’s fire control radar.
System O&S Costs
Finally, Table E-11 provides a rough order-of-magnitude range estimate for the steady-
state annual O&S costs on a per CAP basis for operating and sustaining the ABIR systems and
the ground segment operations centers out of a forward-deployed OCONUS base for force sizes
of 12 systems (for an average annual surge of CAP operations for 90 days) and 17 systems (for a
higher annual surge of CAP operations for 270 days).
TABLE E-11 ABIR System Average Annual Sustainment Cost for Force Sizes of 12 and 17 for Three CAPS (FY
2010 million $)
ABIR (Reaper MQ-9) Average Annual O&S Costs per CAP
12 17
Unit level manning 13.58 13.58
Operation and consumptiona 10.10 14.31
Nonoperating unit maintenance 1.07 1.07
Sustaining support and investment 15.03 15.03
Indirect and other costs 2.84 2.84
Total average annual O&S cost per CAP 42.63 46.84
aThe annual O&S cost per CAP for the large force size of 17 systems and the associated higher average annual
flying hours per CAP case is the only O&S cost element that directly affects the magnitude of the ground operations
and spare parts consumption costs at both the field and depot levels of maintenance. All the other O&S costs
elements for the manning levels at the forward-deployed OCONUS squadrons are assumed to be fixed for both
cases, along with the other three cost elements listed.
PTSS Systems
Life Cycle Cost Summary
A summary of the 20-yr LCC range estimate for the PTSS space and ground segment
system is summarized in Table E-12. Further details on the basis of the estimates and further
breakout of costs for all three phases of the life cycle are provided in this section.
TABLE E-12 PTSS Total LCC Estimate (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 3.1 4.5
Procurementb 4.4 6.9
Force quantity buy 9-ball constellation + two on-orbit 12-ball constellation + two on-orbit
spares with 7 yr on-orbit life spares with 5 yr on-orbit life
MILCON None required None required
20-yr O&Sc 10.7 25.6
Total 20-yr LCC estimatec 18.2 37.0
aThe development cost range estimate of $3.1 to $4.5 billion includes the PTSS program budget of $1.3 billion
cited in the MDA FY 2012 FYDP PB, which consists of a 1-yr concept development phase beginning in FY 2011
awarded to three contractors followed by a Phase I effort with plans for developing, launching, and operating a set of
first spacecraft articles using an integrated ground control system in FY 2016. The estimate for the Phase I effort
consists of the total nonrecurring development and recurring costs for designing and building the space segment bus,
the optical tracking and communications payloads for two prototype satellites, and the ground segment. The PTSS
prototype satellites will demonstrate early, precise, real-time tracking of ballistic missiles.
E-21
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
As part of the development cost and as the basis for the procurement cost of the first production satellite, the
committee estimated the recurring cost of producing the first two prototype satellites at $550 million each (FY 2010
dollars) based on (1) applying PTSS weight and power budget estimates at the satellite bus and payload subsystem
levels to two parametric representative space system and electro-optical cost models and (2) using each model’s cost
estimating relationships calibrated to previous analogous cost expenditures and comparable parametric data details
from the STSS program at the same subsystem detail for the development build of two prototype satellites. (The
MDA PTSS program office provided the committee with a spreadsheet for PTSS Phase I annual budget costs and
weight and power estimates for the prototype satellites as of May 2010. The two estimating tools used were the
USAF Unmanned Spacecraft Cost Model (USCM) 8th edition and the Galorath SEER EOS parametric model. The
cost estimating relationships of the two cost models have been calibrated against the STSS program’s recurring costs
and weight and power and other parametric data values reported in the March 2010 STSS Cost Analysis
Requirements Description (CARD)).
The MDA budget through FY 2016 does not include the launch vehicle (LV) and LV adapter costs or the costs for
the space segment contractor’s prototype mission integrated system engineering team efforts at the space launch pad
to IA&T and full functional checkout of the two prototype satellites in a stowed configuration onto the upper-stage
shroud of the heavy lift launch vehicle. The committee included the launch booster, launch services, and space
segment contractors’ launch IA&T and checkout costs in development cost estimate. The total launch cost during
the development phase is based on launching the two prototype PTSS satellites on one Atlas V EELV-class booster
capable of lifting both, each with an estimated satellite total wet mass of 1,550 kg, which includes 30 percent weight
margins for the both the PTSS bus and the payload.
bThe procurement cost range estimate of $4.4 billion to $6.9 billion is based on the follow-on build of an
additional 9 to 12 satellites (which includes two on-orbit spares) and an AUPC range estimate for each PTSS
satellite of $452 to $572 million. The PTSS satellite AUPC range estimate for the lower bound, minimum, reference
data point is based on a best case step-down in the second prototype satellite cost for the first unit cost of the
production satellite designed for a 7-yr expected design life. This estimate is then projected forward for the total
build quantity required to reach FOC of a 9-ball constellation based on a highly efficient cost improvement, or
learning curve, of 95-98 percent. The committee based an upper bound, maximum, AUPC estimate using a worst
case, or minimal, step-down in the second prototype satellite for the first unit cost of the production article designed
for a 5-yr expected design life and then projected forward for the total build quantity required to reach FOC of a 12-
ball constellation based on very little or no cost improvement (a flat learning curve). As in the development phase,
the launch cost range estimates are assumed to be the same for the two prototype satellites based on an EELV-class
vehicle capable of lifting two production satellites per launch.
cThe 20-yr O&S cost range estimate covers the fixed costs for the ground segment infrastructure and personnel
needed beginning with the first two prototype satellites on orbit and continuing forward for the production of on-
orbit satellites within the constellation for the following tasks: (1) on-orbit satellite station-keeping and maintaining
tracking, telemetry, and communications, and (2) mission command and control (C2) needed for passing on satellite
precision tracking data for augmenting the planned terrestrial sensor network.
The O&S cost range estimate also includes the cost of producing and launching the additional replacement
satellites needed for sustaining the constellation size, where (1) the lower bound, or minimum, cost estimate is based
on sustaining the 9-ball constellation based on satellites with an expected average on-orbit life of 7 years, and (2) an
upper bound, or maximum, cost estimate is based on sustaining the 12-ball constellation based on satellites with an
expected average on-orbit life of 5 years.
Relevant Investment Costs
As of May 2010, the projected investment cost beginning in FY 2011 and continuing
through FY 2016 is $1.3 billion (constant FY 2010 dollars). According to MDA, this investment
and the annual budget investment of $217 million reflects a 1-yr concept development phase
beginning in FY 2011 followed by a Phase I effort beginning later in FY 2011, with plans for
delivery and launch of two prototype satellites by late FY 2015. The prototypes “will
E-22
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
demonstrate early, precise, real-time tracking of ballistic missiles.20 The cost includes the
estimated budget for FY 2016 of the Phase I effort to cover the costs for operating the two
prototype satellites and augmenting the “planned terrestrial (surface and airborne) sensor
network... with [a demonstrated] precision tracking [capability] from space.”21
The investment costs are based on the MDA PTSS program budget estimates as of May-
2010. The program budget request for FY 2012 at the time was still under development so the
budget had yet to be determined. The PTSS Phase I annual program budget estimates through
FY 2016 consist of all nonrecurring development and recurring cost estimates for the space
segment bus, the optical tracking and communications payloads, the ground segment, the launch
vehicle (LV), and LV adapter costs as well as the costs for the contractor’s prototype mission
integrated system engineering team, system engineering program manager, the space segment
IA&T, and the operations and testing of the prototype satellites. The roll-up of the total annual
budget also included an estimate of the government program operations costs. The MDA PTSS
program office provided a spreadsheet of PTSS Phase I annual budget costs and weight and
power estimates of the prototype satellites. The development cost budget has been updated since
May 2010 to reflect two February 2011 documents: “MDA Fiscal Year 2012 Budget Outline”
and “FY 2012 Appropriations Summary,” RDT&E PTSS program element line item budget from
2011 through FY 2016.
System Acquisition Costs
For the purposes of estimating the recurring cost of prototype and an operational
projected baseline constellation of nine PTSS satellites, the committee reviewed the MDA’s
PTSS Phase I program budget projection and span time frame of 5 years from the start of
concept definition through delivery and launch of the first two prototype satellites as the best
case, or lower bound, estimate of $1,058 million (in FY 2010 dollars) through the end of FY
2015. Based on the best available analogous comparison of the STSS program’s expended
average annual costs and development time frames reported in the STSS CARD document from
March 201022 and the most recent STSS program percent cost growth reported by GAO,23 the
committee derived an upper bound PTSS Phase I estimate of $1,354 million (also in FY 2010
dollars) based on a representative SSTS program cost growth of 28 percent over the 7 years of
development span time beginning in April 2002, when MDA took over the Air Force SBIRS
Low program and the contractor team had authority to proceed through the refurbishment and
20
See MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit R-2,
RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0604883C: Precission Tracking Space System, February 2010.
21Ibid.
22MDA. 2010. “Space Tracking and Surveillance system (STSS) Demonstration Satellites” Cost Analysis
Requirements Description (Card), March 1.
23GAO. 2010. “Report to Congressional Committees–Defense Acquisitions: Assessments of Selected Weapon
Programs,” GAO-10-388SP, March.
E-23
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
launching of the two STSS demonstrations satellites in September 2009,24
The committee was able to derive the first unit (T1) costs for the first prototype satellite
based on first parsing out the Phase I space segment recurring portion of the costs from the
MDA-provided Phase I annual program budgets. This was done by assuming that the Phase I
portion of the nonrecurring Phase I development prototype time frame is a best case (optimistic)
estimate comparable to the STSS program’s time frame of slightly less than 2 years (23 months)
from the MDA contractor team’s ATP in April 2004 through prototype satellite concept design
review (CDR) in March 2004.
Table E-13 provides a summary of our PTSS T1 prototype satellite unit cost and the
projected cumulative average unit costs for the Phase II procurement of a constellation of nine
on-orbit satellites and two spares.
TABLE E-13 PTSS Satellite Recurring Unit Cost Estimates (FY 2010 million $)
Cumulative Satellite Cost
T1 Prototype Satellite Cost (9-Ball Constellation)
Low High Low High
Total PTSS satellite unit costa 198.1 250.5 148.9 187.8
Government office/program operations 10.9 10.9 9.8 9.8
Contractor satellite unit cost 187.2 239.6 139.1 178.0
PTSS 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
SE/PM 23.2 29.8 17.3 22.1
IA&T (space segment) 29.1 37.2 21.6 27.6
Space segment 110.8 141.8 82.3 105.3
Bus 55.0 70.5 38.3 49.1
Payload 55.7 71.3 43.9 56.3
Optical tracking P/L 34.0 43.6 26.8 34.4
Communications P/L 21.7 27.8 17.1 21.9
Operations and test 24.0 30.7 17.8 22.8
NOTE: P/L, payload; SE/PM, system engineering/project manager
aThe cumulative average unit costs for the space segment bus are based on first starting with a step-down cost of
10 percent from the second prototype satellite cost to the first production unit cost, and then projecting forward a
cumulative average unit cost for a total of 11 satellites based on a 95 percent representative cost improvement factor
for bus production. The same 10 percent step-down factor is applied to the first production unit cost for both PTSS
payloads and then a cumulative average unit cost is projected for a total quantity of 11 satellites based on a slightly
higher 98 percent learning curve factor for payload production.
MDA’s May 2010 PTSS Phase I annual program budgets submitted to the committee
also included a program launch cost estimate of $145 million (in FY 2010 dollars) based on
launching the two prototype PTSS satellites on an Atlas V based on a total wet mass estimate of
1,550 kg, which includes 30 percent weight margins for the bus and the two payloads.
24This upper bound estimate is based on GAO reporting in March 2010 that MDA STSS program office officials
stated that there were 2 years of prototype satellite launch delays, and over the MDA period of performance contract
costs increased by 40 percent, or $385 million, which included about $115 million to address the various hardware
issues that drove the launch delays. Since there was a 3-year gap in the STSS program in the transition from the Air
Force to MDA and the majority of the development was focused on the STSS satellites’ refurbishment, the
committee reduced the cost growth due to the added costs for resolving hardware issues that resulted in launch
schedule delays and assumed 28 percent was a more representative cost growth factor for estimating the upper
bound PTSS Phase I program cost. The committee used this same 28 percent cost growth factor for estimating the
upper bound or high estimates for the T1 PTSS prototype satellite cost and the Phase II average recurring unit costs
of the constellation of operational satellites.
E-24
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
System O&S Costs
Since this PTSS represents an MDA new start program that begins with the concept
definition phase, the committee estimated the average annual sustainment costs as a rough order
of magnitude (ROM) annual projected O&S cost of between $66 million and $108 million (in
FY 2010 dollars). The low estimate is based on the MDA PTSS program office’s annual budget
projection for FY 2016, which represents the fiscal year immediately following the planned
launch of the two prototype satellites. The primary cost is for sustaining systems engineering
and program management and ground segment operations. The upper bound, or high, estimate is
based on the SSTS budget request for FY 2011 for testing the two on-orbit demonstrations,
executing critical engagement conditions, and collecting test data used in updating, verifying,
and validating the modeling and simulation representations used for assessing system
performance. After completing the Phase II production, delivery, and successful launch of the
nine-ball PTSS constellation so that it achieves FOC, the steady-state annual average
sustainment costs for the system should consist of (1) ground segment operations centers for
satellite on-orbit operations comprising station keeping, telemetry tracking, and health
monitoring and (2) mission control centers for managing and directing on-orbit satellites’ sensor
data-link interfaces to interceptor fire control radars through the BMDS C2BMC
communications network. The average on-orbit life of satellites is assumed to be the 5-yr design
life.
FURTHER COST DETAILS FOR OTHER SYSTEM ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED
Air-Launched Hit-to-Kill Systems
This section provides LCC range estimates for the development, procurement, and O&S
costs of air-launched hit-to-kill (ALHK) interceptor missiles and associated airborne platforms
based on the two Air Force/MDA design concepts the committee assessed as best able to meet
the requirements for longer ranges and having a higher burnout velocity than the network-centric
airborne defense element (NCADE) and air-launched PAC-3 missile concepts that have also
been considered by MDA. At the time the committee was briefed by the Air Force/MDA back in
July 2010,25 the MDA ALHK study team had not recommended one specific interceptor—kill
vehicles or airborne platforms with onboard sensors—over another for development.
Life Cycle Cost Summary
Table E-14 summarized the ALHK Interceptor system 20-yr LCC range estimate at
between $10.5 billion and $17.6 billion. A more detailed breakout by LCC phase is provided
later in this section, as are further details on the basis for these estimates.
25Linton Wells III, MDA/DE, and Lt Col Jordan Thomas, USAF/A5XS, “Air Launched Hit-to-Kill in Ballistic
Missile Defense Study,” presentation to the committee, July 16, 2010.
E-25
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-14 Air Launched Hit-to-Kill Interceptor System Total LCC Estimate (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 2.8 5.4
Procurementb 7.6 11.2
Force quantity buy 1,000 interceptors with 18-in. 1,000 interceptors with 18-in.
boosters and modified SM-3 Block boosters and advanced KV and 100
IB KV and 100 retrofitted F-15Cs retrofitted F-15Cs
MILCON None required None required
20-yr O&Sc 0.11 0.97
Total 20-yr LCC estimate 10.5 17.6
aThe ALHK interceptor development program cost range estimates of between $2.8 billion to $5.4 billion (in FY
2010 dollars) over 12- and 15-yr time frames is based on going forward from technology development through the
systems development and demonstration (SDD) phases for two ALHK interceptor missile options. As part of the
SDD phase estimate, the development cost includes the procurement and flight testing of two advanced targeting
pods installed on two F-15C test bed fighters configured with the existing onboard AN/APG-63(V)3 radar and either
a LITENING or SNIPER targeting pod.
The SDD phase costs consists of estimates for the F-15C-unique development activities and for the concurrent
design, integration, and testing of the ALHK missiles into two F-15C test bed aircraft.
The upper bound, or maximum, development estimate includes a contingency cost for mitigating two known risk
reduction items and potential long-poles in the tent relative to beginning the SDD phase for demonstrating (1)
airborne IR stereo ranging of ballistic missiles with two or more fighters flying in formation with the same sensor
suite and (2) airborne Link-16 communications package integrated with BMDS off-board sensor systems (e. g., the
proposed ABIR transmitting cueing target object map updates to the ALHK booster via the onboard fire control unit
prior to KV vehicle separation.
The SDD range estimates include the costs of designing in airframe design modification for (1) retrofitting at least
two F-15Cs as flight test articles to accommodate the weapons carriage loads of each missile option, (2) designing
modifications to the fighter’s existing stores management system, and (3) the additional system design engineering
required to accommodate, integrate, and test either the LITENING G4 or the SNIPER surrogate pods on the two
test bed fighters. Consistent with the Air Force/MDA briefing to the committee, the committee assumed the two F-
15C fighters would be taken from the existing Air Force active fighter inventory or inactive (soon to be retired)
drawdown fighter force.
bThe procurement retrofit range cost estimate of between $7.6 billion and $11.2 billion is based on an estimated
AUPC for both ALHK missile options, $7 million and $8.3 million, and a range estimate of the average retrofit
recurring cost per F-15C of between $6 million up to approximately $29 million for accommodating either a
LITENING G4 pod or a SNIPER surrogate pod.
cThe total O&S marginal cost range estimate for sustaining 100 retrofitting multimission F-15Cs over the 20-yr
service life of between $116 million and $966 million is based on an average marginal annual O&S cost estimate per
CAP of between $0.2 million and $1.3 million.
System Acquisition Costs
Given the early concept design stage that MDA is currently in for evaluating the ALHK
and airborne platform options, the committee felt it was prudent to generate two sets of range
estimates based on two ALHK single-stage interceptor descriptions that MDA described to the
committee back in July 2010 for use on either exo- or exo/high endoatmospheric engagements.
The committee concurred with MDA that both proposed missile design concepts of larger
missiles are technically viable and capable of providing longer standoff ranges and engagement
during the ascent phase.
The first design comprised of an 18 in. diameter booster with an advanced kill vehicle
(AKV) having an estimated total mass of 754 kg and a burnout velocity of approximately 3.5
km/sec. The second design alternative is configured with same size booster diameter and
interceptor length but with a SM-3 Block IB KV-based design that has a higher projected
E-26
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
burnout velocity, up to 4.1 km/sec. The estimated total mass of the second design alternative is
713 kg. Both ALHK interceptor design will require an integrated fire control unit.
MDA has looked at several airborne platform alternatives. The magnitude of the
estimates for development cost and recurring retrofit cost of each mix of airborne platform and
interceptor candidates is driven by the following characteristics of the air vehicle:
Carriage capacity and maximum load (i. e., distributed total missile mass);
Aerodynamic concerns raised by drag penalties, center-of-gravity related issues,
reduced range, increased fuel consumption, and the like; and
Overall launching capability at the optimal altitude, for each platform and each
interceptor.
Manned fighter alternatives have sufficient carriage capacity for at least two interceptors
per fighter for either interceptor option. Depending on the candidate fighter selected, MDA may
be able to leverage to some extent off existing onboard sensors and radar with modifications as
necessary for performing fire control capabilities. Manned bombers can carry the largest
magazine (up to 24 on a B-1) but will require more significant changes to onboard sensors and
fire control for performing independent ballistic missile defense missions. Currently developed
remotely piloted aircraft (RPA) (formerly known as unmanned airborne systems, or UAS) are
limited to carrying NCADE interceptors on the MQ-9 Reaper. Similar to fighters, the large-class
of RPA may be able to leverage to some extent off existing onboard sensors but will require
radar modifications to perform fire control functions.
From the perspective of a candidate airborne platform onboard sensor, MDA stated that
target management should be handled by the same operational methods used in multitarget air-
combat missions using a combination of onboard search radars with IR-assisted laser ranging
and IR search and track (IRST) sensors for stereo ranging. This consists of using onboard (1) RF
and IR sensors to conduct surveillance and make measurements and (2) processors to collect
data, develop stereo tracks, allocate and assign interceptors, upload engagement instructions,
direct interceptors, direct sensors, and conduct hit assessments.
The MDA design concept study team considered the following radars: F-15C AN/APG-
63(V)3, F-15E AN/APG-82(V)1, and F-22 AN/APG-77. The airborne radar selected should
complement the all-weather boost-phase capability of the ALHK missile and be capable of
demonstrating the potential for providing real-time TOM in-flight updates after missile launch
and for communicating and guiding interceptors to predicted intercept points.
The onboard airborne IR sensors contribute to tracking above the clouds or in their
absence. Airborne IR sensor technology can detect a threat in boost at line-of-sight
(LOS)distances. Current fighter IR sensors are range-limited to detect a separated reentry
vehicle (RV). The F-35 distributed aperture system (DAS) has less detection distance than
current SNIPER and LITENING pods for detecting ballistic missile threats after separation.
To establishing a cost baseline for each ALHK interceptor missile option, and consistent
with the Air Force/MDA briefing, the committee selected the F-15C as the common airborne
platform configured with the same onboard augmented sensor suite. The committee set the cost
baseline for the set of sensors required on the Air Force/MDA set of projected performance
projections and other assumptions provided in the briefing.
For an airborne intercept in boost phase, the Air Force/MDA assumed surveillance would
be performed with airborne radar seeing through the clouds and/or with onboard infrared search
and track (IRST) sensors. This combination of radar and IRST sensors would also be capable of
E-27
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
detecting, tracking, classifying, and predicting the ballistic missile trajectory and uploading
instructions to the interceptor missile.
To employ a shoot-look-shoot airborne intercept capability, the committee estimated the
cost of developing a kit for ALTK missile system modification and the cost of recurring
procurement retrofit as ranges, with the lower bound, or minimum, cost baseline consisting of
using the existing F-15Cs able to carry a weapons load of two 18-in. boosters with a KV similar
to the SM-3 Block 1B design; the onboard existing AN/APG-63(V)3 radar with the airframe
would be retrofitted only as needed to accommodate the size, weight, and power (SWaP)
required for installing an already designed and in-production LITENING G4 pod.26
The upper bound, or maximum, cost baseline estimate is for the following:
Same F-15C airborne platform with the capability to carry two 18-in. boosters of an
advanced KV design and onboard existing AN/APG-63(V)3 radar and
Airframe retrofitted only as needed to accommodate the SWaP required for installing
a SNIPER surrogate pod design needed for meeting the higher end performance range
projected in the USAF/MDA briefing.
For this maximum cost baseline configuration, the committee assumed that the costs of
developing a nonrecurring modification kit and of recurring procurement retrofit of the SNIPER
surrogate pod would have to cover modifying the existing SNIPER Extended Range (XR)
Advanced Targeting Pod (ATP).27
The development cost is for configuring F-15Cs will vary. They could range from
revalidating and using the same previously designed modification kits for installing the
LITENING G4 system to modifying the existing SNIPER XR ATP system and the newly
designed modification kits for installing the SNIPER surrogate system on the F-15C. For both
IRST systems, integration and testing with F-15C flight test articles will be required to ensure
that the unique ballistic missile performance tracking requirements have been met before
proceeding with production.
According to the Air Force/MDA briefing, the current development investment
commitment focuses on advanced technology efforts. A decision on Materiel Development led
by the Air Force Materiel Command involved funding in FY 2010 at $300,000 (in FY 2010
dollars). An Air Force/MDA Joint Concept Technology Development (JCTD) effort awarded
two contractor proposals for development of an Air National Guard NCADE concept with
funding estimated at approximately $40 million over a 3-yr period beginning in FY 2011.
26In November 2008, the Air Force began ordering the LITENING next-generation (G4) targeting sensor system
under a contract with the 647th Aeronautical Systems Squadron. (See Northrop Grumman press release:
“Northrop-Grumman Receives $120 Million Order to Supply LITENING Gen 4 Targeting Sensor Systems,” Global
Newswire, September 25, 2008.) This contract was followed by an additional order from the Air Force for 99 new
LITENING G4 pods and 241 modification kits for installation and/or retrofit on F-15s as well as other fighter and
attack aircraft. The LITENING G4 is the basis for the Air Force’s LITENING-SE. It includes an all-digital 1024 by
1024 pixel forward-looking IR sensor; a laser targeting program with improved target recognition across a wide
range of conditions; and a plug-and-play data-link system that accepts a wide variety of off-board data links without
further modifications.
27In August 2001, the Air Force awarded a contract under its Advanced Targeting Pod—Sensor Enhancement
program to Lockheed Martin for procurement of the SNIPER XR ATPs. The buy of up to 522 pods was for the
product and deployment on Air Force F-15CJ Block 50 aircraft and Air National Guard F-15 Block 30 aircraft. The
delivery of 24 systems per year began in FY 2002 and ended in FY 2008. (See “Sniper XR/ATP—Advanced
Targeting Pod,” Global Security Web site.)
E-28
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The ALHK Interceptor development program cost range estimates of between $2.8
billion and $5.4 billion (in FY 2010 dollars) over 12- and 15-yr time frames for going forward
from technology development through the SDD phases, along with the time frame range
estimates for each phase for the two ALHK interceptor missile options are summarized in Table
E-15. As part of the SDD phase estimate, the development cost includes the procurement and
flight testing of two advanced targeting pods installed on two F-15C test bed fighters configured
with the existing onboard AN/APG-63(V)3 radar and either of the previously described
LITENING or SNIPER targeting pods.
Consistent with the basis for the cost range estimated for the SDD phase, the committee
assumed the procurement retrofit range cost estimate for accommodating either a LITENING G4
TABLE E-15 ALHK Interceptor Program Development Cost Estimates (FY 2010 billion$)
Air Force/MDA Description
of Development Phase
Development Costa Effort and Missile TRL Development Time (Yr)c
Cost Component Minimumd Maximume Assessmentsb Minimumc Maximumf
Fighter/ALHK Cost Benefit 0.001 0.008 Conduct detailed BMDS 0.5 1.5
Studyg cost/benefit analysis.
F-15C unique technology 0.3 0.4 Airborne demonstration of 3 3
development (risk reduction in-formation IR stereo
phase)h imaging and off-board Link-
16 communications with
BMDS sensors.
F-15C unique SDD phased 0.5 0.7 Integrate new sensors, fire 3 3
control S/W dev, flight tests
and stores separation.
SDD phase and ALHK Intercept ALTK
missile optionse only application
18-in. booster with SM-3 2.1 3.2 3 3 8.5 10
Block IB KV
18-in. booster with 2.9 4.4 3 3 9 10.5
advanced KV
Total time
Total development cost 2.8 to 3.5 4.3 to 5.4 frame (yr) 12 to 12.5 14.5 to 15
aThe development cost range estimate listed is for two acquisition phases, technology development and SDD; the
latter phase costs consist of estimates for (1) the F-15C unique development activities and (2) the concurrent design,
integration, and testing of the ALHK missiles into two F-15C test bed aircraft.
bFor each ALKK missile option, the committee assumed the same assessed value for the TRLs that the Air Force
and MDA cited as one of the primary factors for driving both the nonrecurring portion of the SDD costs and the time
frame for development from Milestone B contract go-ahead through the modified fighter ALHK Interceptor missile
system’s critical design review (CDR).
c Consistent with the minimum development cost estimates, the minimum time frames listed for the technology
development and SDD are consistent with the Air Force and MDA schedule estimates. The concurrent F-15C and
ALHK activities during the SDD phase minimum total time frames of between 8.5 or 9 years includes
approximately 6 years to fully configure and integrate the first F-15C test bed platform. For both ALHK options the
minimum SDD time frame estimates are driven by designing an 18 in. booster over an 8.5-yr time frame. However,
the committee assumed, consistent with Air Force and MDA, that additional development time to complete an
advanced KV extends the overall minimum SDD schedule by at least 6 months.
dThe SDD range estimates unique to the F-15C airborne platform are for the cost of designing in airframe design
modification for retrofitting at least two F-15Cs as flight test articles to accommodate the weapons carriage loads of
each missile option, designing modifications to the fighter’s existing stores management system, and the additional
system design engineering required to accommodate, integrate, and test either the LITENING G4 or SNIPER
surrogate pods on the two test bed fighters. The committee assumed the two F-15C fighters would be taken from the
existing Air Force active fighter inventory or inactive (soon to be retired) drawdown fighter force.
E-29
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Even though the committee for the sake of consistency went along with the Air Force/MDA briefing choice of the
F-15C as the threshold airborne system baseline selected for the LCC estimates presented in this section, there may
be a better mix of fighter choices for the Air Force and MDA to consider prior to beginning the SDD phase. Given
the early stages of this development activity and the average age of over 25 years for the Air Force active duty
inventory of 233 F-15C/Ds (see active duty inventory quantities for the F-15C/D and the average service life taken
from “2010 USAF Almanac,” Air Force Magazine, May 2010), the continuing investment in an F-15C service life
extension program to sustain these retrofitted aging fighters may not provide the best return on investment over a
20-yr life cycle sustainment cost relative to the total LCC cost of using F-35A production fighters currently entering
the USAF inventory. (In the Congressional Research Service (CRS) study by Jeremiah Gertler, “F-35 Joint Strike
Fighter (JSF) Program: Background and Issues for Congress Report,” CRS RL30563, September 23, 2010, the
annual quantity of Air Force F-35As procured through FY 2010 was listed at 25, with a request for 23 more in FY
2011. At the time of the CRS report, past DOD plans increased the procurement for F-35As to a sustained rate of 80
aircraft per year, leading to a total procurement planned of 1,763 F-35As by around FY 2034.
eThe SDD range estimate is the cost for the system engineering design, development, testing, and procurement of
a sufficient quantity of either of the two ALHK interceptor missile options for DT and initial operational testing and
evaluation (IOT&E) flight testing required on the two F-15C test bed aircraft.
fThe maximum time frames listed for the cost-benefits study are consistent with the estimates specified in the Air
Force and MDA briefing along with the SDD time frame of 3 years for the F-15C-unique development activities.
However, owing to the uncertainty of the time frames for completing and fully testing a new 18-in. booster and
integrating it with either an existing SM-3 Block IB or an advanced new design, the committee added another 1.5
years, or between 15 and 20 percent more time, as slack time for mitigating potential risks.
gThe cost-benefit study was described in the Air Force/MDA briefing as an 18-month study, the funding for which
(between $15 million and $30 million in FY 2010 dollars) was at the time of the briefing was pending joint
approval.
hThe Air Force and MDA identified the two development risk reduction items and potential “long-poles in the
tent” relative to beginning the SDD phase for improving the technical maturity and demonstrating the capability of
demonstrating airborne IR stereo ranging of ballistic missiles with two or more fighters flying in formation with the
same sensor suite and airborne Link-16 communications package integrated with BMDS off-board sensor systems
(e. g., the proposed ABIR transmitting cueing data on TOM updates to the ALHK booster via the onboard fire
control unit prior to KV separation.
pod or a SNIPER surrogate pod would vary depending on the current onboard F-15C sensor suite
configuration of each fighter before or shortly after the approval to begin production of the
ALHK Interceptor missiles.
Table E-16 summarizes the total procurement cost range estimate of between $7.6 billion
and $11.2 billion, made up of an estimated AUPC for both ALHK missile options of between $7
million and $8.3 million each and a range estimate for the average retrofit recurring cost per F-
15C of between $6 million and approximately $29 million (all in FY 2010 dollars.).
TABLE E-16 ALHK Interceptor Program Procurement Cost Estimates (FY 2010 dollars)
Average Retrofit Cost Total Procurement
ALHK per F-15C Cost
Missile Interceptor Missile AUPC F-15C (FY 2010 million $) (FY 2010 billion $)
Option Quantitya (FY 2010 million $)a Quantitya Minimuma Maximumb Minimum Maximum
18-in. 1,000 7.0 100 6.0 24.8 7.6 9.5
booster with
SM-3 Block
IB KV
18-in. 1,000 8.3 100 8.3 29.4 9.1 11.2
booster with
advanced
KV
aFor each of the two options, the committee assumed based the AUPC estimates on the same ALHK missile
interceptor buy quantity of 1,000 and weight-based cost estimates as specified in the Air Force/MDA briefing. The
E-30
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
lower bound, or minimum, average recurring cost range estimates per fighter are based on, as needed, retrofitting
and installing the latest LITENING or SNIPER targeting pods discussed above, associated modification kits and
system testing for 100 F-15C fighters, which is the same quantity also previously specified by the Air Force and
MDA study team. The lower bound or minimum average retrofit costs per F-15C are the same as the values stated
in the Air Force/MDA briefing. The assumption the Air Force and MDA briefers made for the ALHK missiles
interceptor study was that there would be up to 100 F-15C Air Force and Air National Guard fighters available. The
Air Force and MDA average retrofit costs per F-15C are based on SPO estimates of platform and integration costs.
bThe upper bound, or maximum, average retrofit cost per F-15C development cost for each option is based on an
increased retrofit effort, where the estimates are based on the average relative cost percentage factor of 1.42 times
the AUPC cost to account for the costs of fabrication for unique F-15C airframe interface electrical and mechanical
hardware, installation and integration of targeting pods and the modification kits, and end-to-end system test and
evaluation.
F-15Cs configured with the onboard sensor suite and configured with a weapons carriage
capable of loading two ALHK missiles per fighter are assumed to begin incurring annual O&S
costs the fiscal year when IOC is met, which the Air Force and MDA briefing defined when 50
interceptor missiles are produced in low-rate initial production (LRIP) and delivered to one
designated fighter squadron along with at least five retrofitted combat-ready F-15Cs. FOC was
defined as being achieved 7 years later, when delivery of the total quantity of 1,000 interceptors
is phased into the inventory and all 100 retrofitted F-15Cs are in the fighter force and available
for forward deployment to fighter squadrons.
The Air Force and MDA briefing estimated the O&S costs over a 15-yr period as the
delta cost, or difference, between the sustainment costs of retrofitting F-15Cs and the cost of
sustaining F-15Cs already in the Air Force active inventory. The O&S estimate based on
marginal costs allows the combatant commanders (COCOMs) additional flexibility in using the
retrofitted F-15C for other fighter missions.
System O&S Costs
When needed for the ballistic missile defense mission, the COCOM would forward
deploy the F-15Cs in CAPs to attempt a boost, or early, intercept by ensuring the placement and
continuous on-station coverage needed. The COCOMs can also be in the rear and deploy the
retrofitted F-15Cs in CAPs closer to a defended area. In both cases, robust and timely
communication links of sufficient bandwidth are necessary to transfer fire-quality tracks to and
from the ALHK F-15C platform. In either CONOPS scenario, the ALHK interceptors can be
used to execute limited boost-phase intercepts but will likely require as a prerequisite that the Air
Force penetrate enemy airspace to gain air supremacy in advance of the deployment of these
CAPs.
For purposes of arriving at O&S costs, the committee estimated the average marginal
annual O&S costs on both a per fighter basis and a per CAP basis with three retrofitted F-16Cs
each. It limited the O&S estimates to retrofitted F-15Cs for performing this ballistic missile
defense mission. Using the above CONOPS and F-15Cs per CAP set of assumptions, the
committee computed the average annual O&S delta cost over a steady-state period of 15 years
for sustaining 100 F-15Cs in the active inventory at $425,000, which is the equivalent of 1.2
percent of the rough-order-of-magnitude (ROM) annual O&S estimate of $4.3 million for
sustaining today’s Air Force fleet of F-15C/Ds (in FY 2010 dollars). Given the uncertainty in
the CONOPS and varying percentage use of the force of retrofitted F-15Cs to perform ballistic
missile tracking and intercept missions along with other fighter missions, the committee
considered this a lower bound estimate of the marginal O&S cost of sustaining this fighter force
E-31
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
as it operates these missions over a 20-yr service life. The marginal O&S estimate also does not
include any most likely USAF investments in extending the service life of the F-15C airframe,
engine, and other flight-critical equipment to continue operations from the start of the
sustainment phase projected by the Air Force and MDA to begin in FY 2018 and continue for at
least another 20 years to FY-2038.28
Table E-17 lists the minimum and maximum average marginal annual O&S cost per
aircraft and per CAP, and total marginal O&S costs for 100 retrofitted multimission F-15Cs from
IOC forward through FOC and continuing on over the 20-yr service life for sustaining.
TABLE E-17 Retrofitted F-15C Marginal O&S Cost Estimates (FY 2010 dollars)
Total Marginal O&S Costs over 20-Yr
Average Marginal Annual O&S Costs Service Life
Retrofitted F-15C (thousand $) F-15C CAP (million $) (million $)
Minimum 51 0.2 116
Maximuma 426 1.3 966
aThe maximum marginal cost is based on an eightfold increase over the minimum average marginal annual O&S
cost per retrofitted F-15C, which is equates to an increase in the marginal cost of up to 10 percent of the average
annual cost of F-15C/Ds over the minimum estimate based on 1.2 percent.
Space-Based Interceptor Systems
Cost Overview and Analysis Approach of SBI Constellation
The committee investigated three options for an SBI system: a boost-phase system and a
hybrid system capable of doing both boost-phase and midcourse intercept, and a satellite for
midcourse intercept. The criterion for optimization was to minimize the total cost from initial
R&D through a 20-yr LCC.
The first option was a satellite capable of intercepting both solid and liquid ICBMS with
very low leakage, and the second could only achieve very low leakage against liquid ICBMs.
For the second class, some geometric leakage for solid ICBMs would be expected,
approximately 30 percent for 0-sec decision time and 60 percent for 30-sec decision time; the
midcourse capability would be used to deal with the leakage. The third class was a constellation
capable of midcourse intercepts only.
The design requirements for the KV were reviewed, with an eye toward minimizing the
mass but preserving the functionality needed as well as using sound design principles and
technologies that are robust and credible. For the hybrid system the committee slightly relaxed
the divert requirement from 2.5 km/sec, used by the APS report to assure the ability to engage
solids, to 2.0 km/sec. This reduction of divert velocity may degrade the ability to intercept solid
ICBMs and their unanticipated acceleration, but the committee has not tried to quantify that loss.
The saving in mass (and therefore cost) is substantial.
Three generic KVs were considered, one for each type of constellations. One was
optimized for boost phase only, another was optimized to be able to do both boost phase and
midcourse intercepts, and, finally, one was only for midcourse intercepts. The boost phase only
KV has a divert velocity of 2.5 km/sec to be able to engage solids and 10-cm diameter optics.
28A recent Aircraft Structural Integrity Program (ASIP) briefing by the Air Force from Warner Robbins AFB
projected the service life and active duty of Air National Guard and Reserve inventory for providing air superiority
missions of approximately 250 F-15Cs to extend out to the mid-2020s. (Joseph D. Lane, USAF-WR-ALC/GRM
Eagle Division, and Paul A. Reid, Boeing, “Certifying the F-15C Beyond 2025,” Aircraft Structural Integrity
Program (ASIP) 2010 Conference, presentation to the committee, December 2, 2010.)
E-32
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The hybrid system has a divert velocity of 2.0 km/sec and 20-cm diameter optics. The
midcourse only KV has a divert velocity of 0.6 km/sec and 20-cm diameter optics. For doing
midcourse intercepts the committee chose 20-cm diameter optics rather than 30 cm as was used
for ground-based interceptors because the long viewing is neither needed nor wanted for SBIs.
First, the number of satellites is large, so no target will be far from one of them. The second
reason has to do with the orbital mechanics. Once launched the SBI will likely have a very high
velocity, perhaps even an escape velocity. A target 3,000 km away means that the KV would
need to expend resources to go “around the corner” of Earth to reach the target.
For a given KV, a parametric search was made varying burnout velocity (v ). In this
bo
manner, the number of satellites was determined with the requirement of having at least two
satellites within range of any single threat missile. The committee considered both one-stage and
two-stage boosters but found that for the speeds needed, one-stage boosters are impractical. The
associated LCC was computed as was the value of v. In this way the number of satellites was
bo
found that minimized that cost.
LCC) included these:
Development,
Production,
Life jacket mass computed at 50 percent of SBI (booster plus KV mass),
Learning curve assumptions for the average unit cost of the SBI satellite as a function
of the total production buy quantity,
Average 7-yr SABI satellite on-orbit lifetime and two replacements launches over the
20 years of system sustainment,
Launch costs, and
Sustainment costs for operating and maintaining the constellation size and fixed
number of SBI satellites on-orbit over a 20-yr period.
The committee evaluated five cases of constellations and estimated the minimum LCCs
for the optimum SBI with v = 5 km/sec. It required that, on average, at least two satellites be
bo
within range for an intercept:
Case 1. Boost-phase coverage of the entire United States with at least one satellite within
range against both solid and liquid ICBMs. Decision time = 0 sec.
Case 2. Boost-phase coverage as in Case 1, except that the design only assures coverage
against liquids, and midcourse capability is added.
Case 3. Same as Case 1, except decision time = 30 sec.
Case 4. Same as Case 2, except decision time = 30 sec.
Case 5. Only midcourse defense is offered.
Table E-18 summarizes the results of this optimization for the defense of the entire
United States29 and most of Canada against ICBM Launches from Iran or North Korea for
decision times of td = 0 sec and 30 sec.
29The entire United States means CONUS, Alaska, and Hawaii. “Most of Canada” means coverage over areas
south of the northernmost part of Alaska.
E-33
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-18 Number of Satellites, Other Parameters, and LCC
Optics KV KV SBI 20-Yr LCC Cost
Diameter Mass Divert Mass (FY 2010 billion $)
Description (cm) (kg) km/sec (kg) N Minimum Maximum
sat
Decision time t = 0 sec
d
Case 1: BPI solid + liquid 10 164 2.5 1,978 1,000 296 500
BPI
Case 2: BPI liquid + 20 149 2.0 1,796 400 119 200
midcourse
Decision time t = 30 sec
d
Case 3: BPI solid + liquid 10 164 2.5 1,978 2,000 581 978
Case 4: BPI liquid + 20 149 2.0 1,796 650 187 311
midcourse
Case 5: Midcourse only 20 81 0.6 977 200 43 73
Each of these SBIs needs a “garage” or a “life jacket” in orbit to provide housing and
certain utilities. Table E-19 provides a representative list of the life-jacket hardware envisioned
to fill these functions. The committee estimated the total mass of the life jacket to be
approximately 50 percent of the total mass of the SBI including the KV.
TABLE E-19 SBI Life Jacket Subsystems and Hardware
Propulsion
Hall effect ion engine and controls (apogee kick motor)
Propellant
Structure and shielding (survivability housing) radiators
Electrical Power
Solar panel power distribution unit
Batteries
DC-to-DC convertors (power convertor electronics)
RF receiver and antenna (tracking telemetry and communications)
Attitude determination and control
Momentum wheels and controller
Horizon/star tracker sensors
Low-rate attitude control system for momentum dump
Cost Trade-off Results of Varying SBI Booster Burnout Velocities
The committee took the KV of Cases 2, 3, and 4 and explored the 20-yr LCC as a
function of v.
bo
Figure E-4 shows a plot of the two-stage mass, the total constellation mass, and the 20-yr
LCC (average of the minimum and maximum values) as a function of v of the interceptor. To
bo
do this it did the following: For each value of v an appropriate SBI booster was chosen to
bo
achieve v for the given payload. For each value of v the number of satellites was computed
bo bo
to achieve the needed coverage. From the SBI mass, the associated life jacket mass, and the
number of satellites placed in orbit, the total mass to orbit was computed. The LCC was
computed using the methodology described below and plotted. The minimum is for v between
bo
4 and 5 km/sec. The committee chose 5 km/sec for all subsequent design work. Although the
minimum of the curve is a little lower, 5 km/sec was chosen to provide a somewhat robust design
in case more reach should be needed.
A major driver of the LCC is the cost of delivering the total mass of the constellation to
orbit. To deploy a total SBI system constellation of this size and total mass would require large
increase in the current annual U. S. launch capacity, the construction of additional launch pads
E-34
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
and associated facilities, and major increases in the production rate of evolved extendable launch
vehicle (EELV)-class and emerging next-generation smaller class of launch lift vehicles, such as
the Falcon 9 family of Space X vehicles. From a launch lift readiness best-case perspective,
EELV-class Delta IV H (heavy) launch vehicles could lift up to 14 SBI satellites (with life
jackets) at a mass margin of around 15 percent to a 330-km altitude at an orbital inclination of
between 45 and 55 degrees. Of course, this would be contingent upon being able to package all
the satellites along with payload adaptors to fit within the volumetric limitations of the Delta
IV’s upper-stage shroud. Even if this rather optimistic assumption is technically feasible, it
would still require as a best-case scenario a minimum of 115 launches to lift a constellation size
of 1,000 SBI satellites. In a 2006 CBO Report on projections of U. S. launch capacity and
demand through 2020, the minimum number of 115 SBI launches EELV-class heavy-lift launch
vehicles needed is to be compared with the total annual capacity of 50 launches per year
projected and is considerably greater than the total U. S. government and commercial annual
demand of 25 to 30 launches per year projected for 2015 and beyond.30
FIGURE E-4 Optimal booster burnout velocity at lowest LCC.
30For further details see Figure 1-2, “Projections of U. S. Launch Capacity and Demand within the CBO Report,”
in Alternatives for Future U. S. Space-Launch Capabilities, Publication No. 2568, October 2006. CBO defined
“capacity” as the number of launches that the infrastructure and production facilities can support if fully manned and
funded. “Demand” is either the number of launches required on historical launch manifests or current projections of
future launch manifests.
E-35
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Case 1: SBI System for Boost-Phase Defense Missions
Here is an example of the kind of analysis that was done for the LCC estimates. Case 1 is
an SBI constellation system designed for the boost-phase mission against both solid and liquid
ICBMs with a two-stage booster having a v = 5 km/sec, which has been sized to be capable of
bo
lifting a KV with a wet mass of approximately 164 kg. The wet mass of the KV is configured
with the 10-cm optical diameter IR seeker. The DACS consists of four divert thrusters with the
KV capable of a 2.5 km/sec divert velocity and sized for slightly reduced lower bound closing
velocities of 8 km/sec to 14 km/sec. The maximum total time of the KV operation can also be
extended up to 400 sec.
Table E-20 shows SBI system 20-yr LCC range estimates for acquiring and launching an
SBI constellation of about 1,000 satellites and sustaining this fully operational capability over a
20-yr period. Key ground rules and assumptions contained in footnotes to this table, are
consistently applied for this case as well as the other cases.
TABLE E-20 Case 1: SBI System 20-Yr LCCs (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Cost Element Minimum/Low Maximum/High
Research and development
SBI booster 1.1 2.4
KV and seeker 1.1 2.3
Marginal C2BMCa 0.5 1.0
Life jacket 0.4 0.9
NRE I&T cost (30 percent) 0.9 2.0
Subtotalb 4.0 8.7
Production
Two-stage boosterc 10.6 14.4
Kill vehicled 6.3 8.6
Seekere 0.6 0.8
Life jacket 31.9 43.5
Integration and Testf 7.4 27.0
SBI satellitesg 56.8 94.4
Launch servicesh 45.1 77.1
Subtotal 101.9 171.5
Operations (over 20 years)
Satellite and mission operations 4.1 8.2
Replacement SBI satellites 113.6 188.7
Launch servicesi 72.9 123.4
Subtotal 190.6 320.3
Total 296.4 500.5
NOTE: Case 1 has v = 5 km/sec, K divert = 2.5 km/sec, 10-cm optics on the KV, boost-phase liquids, 70 percent
bo v
solids.
aThe RDT&E costs include the marginal cost of designing the communications links and meeting the interface
needs for integrating the on-orbit SBI satellite operations with the ballistic missile defense C2BMC. (The
nonrecurring engineering marginal cost is based on taking the average C2BMC program budget from FY 2008
through FY-2015 as reported in the FY-2011 MDA PB, converting it to FY 2010 dollars, and spreading the average
annual estimate over an assumed 4-yr development timeline.
bThe RDT&E lower bound, or minimum, cost estimate consists of the nonrecurring system design and
engineering minimum cost estimates for modifying a two-stage heritage booster assessed at 50 percent new design,
along with a KV and IR seeker design and packaging of the subsystems and components of the life jacket, which the
committee assessed as a relatively new design. (The assumptions and resulting estimates for the nonrecurring
engineering efforts are based on best engineering judgment as to the current technical maturity or readiness level or
assessed TRL value; the complexity of the design, and the extent to which the past program heritage can be
leveraged for the two-stage booster, the KV (which includes both the DACs and IR seeker), and the life jacket.) It
E-36
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
also includes estimates of the manufacturing, assembly, integration and on-orbit testing costs of producing two sets
of interceptors, KVs, and life jackets and launching two fully configured protoflight SBI satellites as part of the
development phase. (The recurring cost of producing the two prototype SBI satellites is based on an assumed
increase of 50 percent over the first unit, or T1, production cost estimate calculated as the basis for the procurement
cost estimates. This step-back factor of 1.5 is based on a best engineering judgment assumption of higher first-time
labor costs due to the inefficiencies of producing the hardware with a hands-on engineering compared to a more
fully automated manufacturing environment and a higher one-time cost of buying the space-qualified parts needed
only for the two prototypes.
To account for requirements creep, schedule changes and annual budget shift, the upper bound, or maximum,
RDT&E estimate is 72 percent higher than the lower bound, minimum, estimate. This increase is based on the
actual cost growth experienced on an analogous THAAD development program as reported in the most recent DOD
Selected Acquisition Report for this system. (With 90 percent of the effort completed, the THAAD program’s most
recent Selected Acquisition Report of December 31, 2009, reported a contractor RDT&E estimated price at
completion cost that had grown 57 percent since the initial contract award in August 2000. The contract called for
delivering 50 THAAD interceptors and corresponding hardware for two U. S. Army batteries. In constant-year
dollars, the corresponding RDT&E budget over this same time frame also increased by 72 percent.)
cThe two-stage boost phase T1 unit cost is based on applying a weight-based linear regression cost estimate
relationship generated using two analogous data points: the GBI OBV three-stage booster weight of 22,483 kg and
an average unit cost of $47 million (FY 10 dollars) as the lower-bound value of $2.7 million per ton and the Aegis
SM-2 Block IA missile (less the KV) weight of 1,436 kg and an average unit cost of $8.1 million per ton and an
upper-bound value of $8.9 million per ton.
dThe remainder of the KV unit cost estimates for the DACs, avionics, structure, tankage hardware, etc. is based on
applying similar weight and other technical parameters as input values for the Air Force’s latest edition of the
Unmanned Spacecraft Cost Model (USCM). The committee also used the USCM primarily weight-based
parametric model to estimate the life jacket for each of subsystems and components previously listed in Table E-19.
eThe IR seeker unit production cost is based on technical parameter values of the optics diameter, focal plane
array size and material, electronics weights, etc. as input to a commercial parametric cost model, SEER Electro-
Optics.
fThe projected uncertainty in the recurring SBI satellite integration and testing cost estimates is accounted for by
applying a 15 percent factor to the sum of the recurring cost of the two-stage booster, the KV, the seeker, and the life
jacket as the minimum estimate and a 30 percent factor for the maximum estimate.
gThe SBI satellite production cost range estimates are based on computing the first unit, T1, production cost and
then calculating the cumulative average unit costs based on learning curve or CIC slope values to account for
manufacturing labor efficiencies and discounts on parts costs as a function of the quantity being produced. Since the
projected labor efficiencies and material discounts are not fixed and could vary for producing IR seekers, DACs,
avionics, and life jacket subsystems, the committee based the lower bound, or minimum, set of cost estimates on a
steeper CIC slope, 95 percent, compared to an upper bound, or maximum, cost estimate based on a flatter slope, 98
percent.
hFor launch services costs, the committee based the range estimates on the cost to launch a given mass to lower
Earth orbit (LEO). It used this cost to calculate the cost of lifting the total SBI satellite constellation wet mass
required to achieve FOC. The projections are based on the forecast for the current and emerging candidate set of
U. S. launch vehicles available supply and the total U. S. military, NASA, and commercial space system industries’
demand in the FY 2015 to FY 2020 time frame and again in the FY 2025 and beyond time frame for launching
replacement SBI satellites after reaching FOC and continuing over the 20-yr life cycle period. The preceding
section provides further details on the launch service cost and launch lift performance capabilities of the candidate
set of U. S. boosters.
It should be noted that the launch service cost per mass to LEO is based on keeping within the total launch lift
capability of the candidate launch vehicles that have been identified. This total launch mass estimated comprises the
total wet mass of the multiple SBI satellites, the mass of the candidate launch vehicle’s payload adaptor(s), and an
acceptable launch mass margin.
However, it should also be noted that cost factors being applied are also contingent upon ensuring that the
computed total launch lift mass also can be packaged in a stowed configuration to fit within the volumetric
constraints of the upper-stage shroud of the candidate launch vehicle.
As part of the total acquisition cost to reach FOC, the committee set the minimum launch service cost at $13.0
million per ton in FY 2010 dollars based on a representative service cost of approximately $250 million per launch
in FY 2010 dollars for an EELV Delta IV heavy vehicle with a maximum lift of approximately 19,240 kg to 330 km
E-37
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
altitude at a 45 to 55 degree orbital inclination. (The launch services cost information for the EELV class of Delta
IV heavy and medium boosters was extracted from Edgar Zapata, 2008, A Review of Costs of US Evolved
Expendable Launch Vehicles (EELV), National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Kennedy Space Center,
February 5. The specific launch performance information for the Delta IV heavy and medium class of vehicles was
extracted from S. J. Isakowitz, J. B. Hopkins, and J. P. Hopkins, Jr., 2004, “International Reference Guide to Space
Launch Systems,” 4th ed., American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.) The Delta IV Heavy is configured
with a 5-m diameter fairing with two additional core common boosters as strap-on motors to the primary launch
vehicle. The maximum launch service cost was set at $22.2 million per ton based on the same representative service
cost of $250 million per launch for a Delta IV Medium + (5.4) vehicle with a maximum lift of approximately
11,250 kg to 330 km altitude at a 45 degree inclination. The Delta IV Medium launch vehicle is configured with a
5-m diameter fairing with four additional strap-on motors.
i After FOC, the committee set the launch cost per ton for SBI replacement launches in the 20-yr life cycle period
at projected minimum and maximum values in the post FY 2025 time frame. The cost reflected slightly lower costs
owing to the larger projected market supply of smaller launch vehicles, such as SpaceX Corporation’s Falcon 9
boosters launched from several different U. S. sites. These would be viable candidates beyond the Delta IV and
Atlas V expendable vehicles launched from Cape Canaveral and Vandenberg Air Force Base. (Cost and
performance information for Falcon 9 was extracted from SpaceX, 2009, “Falcon 9 User’s Guide,” SCM 2009-010
Revision 1, Figure 4.1 Falcon 9 Block 2 Performance to Low Earth Orbit (Cape Canaveral). The committee set the
minimum value at $10.4 million per ton, 20 percent lower than the previously stated value of $13.0 million per ton
by assuming a proportional number of launches would be performed on the Falcon 9 family of vehicles where
SpaceX Standard Launch Services cited a price (which includes additional 8 percent for re-flight insurance) for a
booster with a maximum lift capability to LEO for approximately 7,200 kg of approximately $8.4 million per ton.
The committee set the maximum value at $20.0 million per ton, or approximately 10 percent lower than the
previously stated value of $22.2 million per ton. This value used a more conservative representative mix of Delta IV
or Atlas V class vehicles, with Falcon 9 boosters as needed to keep up with SBI satellite replacement launch
demands.
Other SBI System Case LCC Summaries
The summary tables for the LCC range estimates for Cases 2 through 5, which vary with
respect to the number of satellites, are provided below as Tables E-21 through E-24.
Costs of Launching Space-Based Interceptors
As discussed in Appendix J, in the section Space-Based Interceptors,” the required total
wet mass of SBI satellites on orbit dominates the design considerations for any space system,
largely because of the very high cost of deploying space systems mass into orbit.
History of Cited EELV Launch Costs Early in the history of the Air Force’s EELV program the
estimated average launch cost was based on an annual launch rate mission model of heavy lift
boosters assuming 95 launches in the FY 2002 to FY 2022 time frame, which would have
corresponded approximately to 5 or 6 launches per year, split evenly among the Atlas V and
Delta IV family of boosters. In FY 2006, if one divided the RDT&E budget for EELV of $838
million by six, the average cost per launch was computed at approximately $150 million in FY
2010 dollars.31 This FY 2006 budget is a 66 percent increase over previous years and reflects the
“new acquisition strategy, which separated the launch price from the infrastructure or launch pad
31The Air Force RDT&E-based estimated in Forecast International, a 2004 space systems market forecast had
cited the Pentagon paying, on average, ~$171 million (in FY 2010 dollars) for each EELV based on a 117-unit buy.
This cost will vary depending on the booster vehicle configuration. This estimate of ~$171 million included cost
growth of 26 percent from FY 2004 to FY 2005 after approximately four Delta IVs and four Atlas Vs had been
produced.
E-38
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-21 Case 2: SBI System 20-Yr LCC Results for 1,000 Satellites (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Cost Element Minimum/Low Maximum/High
Research and development
SBI booster 1.1 2.4
KV and seeker 1.1 2.3
Marginal C2BMC 0.5 1.0
Life jacket 0.4 0.9
NRE I&T cost (30 percent) 0.9 2.0
Subtotal 4.0 8.7
Production
Two-stage booster 10.6 14.4
Kill vehicle 6.3 8.6
Seeker 0.6 0.8
Life jacket 31.9 43.5
Integration and Test 7.4 27.0
SBI satellites 56.8 94.4
Launch services 45.1 77.1
Subtotal 101.9 171.5
Operations (over 20 years)
Satellite and mission operations 4.1 8.2
Replacement SBI satellites 113.6 188.7
Launch services 72.9 123.4
Subtotal 190.6 320.3
Total 296.4 500.5
NOTE: Case 1 has v = 5 km/sec, K divert = 2.5 km/sec, 10-cm optics on the KV, boost-phase liquids, 70 percent
bo v
solids.
TABLE E-22 Case 3: SBI System 20-Yr LCC Results for 2,000 Satellites (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Cost Element Minimum/Low Maximum/High
Research and development
SBI booster 1.1 2.4
KV and seeker 1.1 2.3
Marginal C2BMC 0.5 1.0
Life jacket 0.4 0.9
NRE I&T cost (30 percent) 0.9 2.0
Subtotal 4.0 8.7
Production
Two-stage booster 21.0 28.7
Kill vehicle 12.5 17.1
Seeker 1.2 1.7
Life jacket 63.4 86.5
Integration and Test 14.7 53.6
SBI satellites 112.9 187.6
Launch services 90 153
Subtotal 202.6 340.9
Operations (over 20 years)
Satellite and mission operations 4.1 8.2
Replacement SBI satellites 225.8 375.2
Launch services 144.8 245.3
Subtotal 374.8 628.7
Total 581.3 978.3
NOTE: Case 1 has v = 5 km/sec, K divert = 2.5 km/sec, 10-cm optics on the KV, boost-phase liquids, 70 percent
bo v
solids.
E-39
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-23 Case 4: SBI System 20-Yr LCC Results for 650 Satellites (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Cost Element Minimum/Low Maximum/High
Research and development
SBI booster 1.1 2.3
KV and seeker 1.0 2.2
Marginal C2BMC 0.4 1.0
Life jacket 0.4 0.8
NRE I&T cost (30 percent) 0.9 1.9
Subtotal 4.0 8.1
Production
Two-stage booster 1.4 1.8
Kill vehicle 0.9 1.1
Seeker 0.1 0.1
Life jacket 4.4 5.6
Integration and Test 1.0 3.5
SBI satellites 7.8 12.1
Launch services 4.7 8.0
Subtotal 12.5 20.1
Operations (over 20 years)
Satellite and mission operations 4.1 8.2
Replacement SBI satellites 15.5 24.3
Launch services 7.6 12.8
Subtotal 27.2 45.3
Total 43.7 73.5
NOTE: Case 1 has v = 5 km/sec, K divert = 2.0 km/sec, 20-cm optics on the KV, boost-phase liquids
bo v
+midcourse.
TABLE E-24 Case 5: SBI System 20-Yr LCC Results for 200 Satellites (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Cost Element Minimum/Low Maximum/High
Research and development
SBI booster 1.1 2.3
KV and seeker 1.1 2.2
Marginal C2BMC 0.5 1.0
Life jacket 0.4 0.8
NRE I&T cost (30 percent) 0.9 1.9
Subtotal 3.8 8.2
Production
Two-stage booster 6.6 8.8
Kill vehicle 4.1 5.4
Seeker 0.4 0.6
Life jacket 20.4 27.0
Integration and Test 4.7 16.7
SBI satellites 36.2 58.4
Launch services 26.8 45.8
Subtotal 63.0 104.2
Operations (over 20 years)
Satellite and mission operations 4.1 8.2
Replacement SBI satellites 72.5 116.7
Launch services 43.3 73.3
Subtotal 119.9 198.3
Total 186.7 310.7
NOTE: Case 1 has v = 5 km/sec, K divert = 0.6 km/sec, 20-cm optics on the KV, mid course only.
bo v
E-40
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
and range costs. In that same fiscal year, the AF stated that Follow on Launch Service Buys will
include launch service costs on a fixed price contract.”
Another source, Aviation Week and Space Technology in the article “Rocket Boosters—
To Prop Up Domestic Rocket Industry,” stated that the Air Force had abandoned competition on
April 18, 2005, and cited a higher FY 2006 budget request based on an average EELV launch
and associated services cost estimate of approximately $183 million (in FY 2010 dollars), which
was said to vary depending on the complexity of integrating the payload onto the rocket and the
desired orbit. A more recent NASA launch service contract award with United Launch Alliance
in March 2009 cited a cost of approximately $605 million (in FY 2010 dollars) for launching
multiple space system payloads on four EELV boosters from their Science Mission and Space
Operations Mission Directorates.32 The average launch service cost of approximately $151
million is planned for 2011 through 2014, all of it for designated Atlas V launch vehicles. The
total value of the award includes the costs of the rockets, “plus additional [launch services] under
other contracts for payload processing; launch vehicle integration; and tracking, data and
telemetry support.”33
Launch Service Costs per Launch Lift Mass to Lower Earth Orbit The committee bounded the
cost per launch lift mass to LEO using two different candidate EELV Delta IV configurations
based on the computed SBI total mass launch lift performance values up to an altitude of
approximately 330 km. It should be noted that the actual costs are likely to be higher due to
recent cost increases for EELV.
An upper bound (or pessimistic) estimate of $15.5 million per ton (in FY 2010 dollars)
was computed using the lower-end Delta IV Medium + (5.4) representative booster with a
maximum lift capability of approximately 11,250 kg up to 330 km altitude at 45-degree
inclination angle of performance and a representative launch service cost of approximately $148
million per launch in FY 2002 dollars or $174 million per launch in FY 2010 dollars. Figure E-5
illustrates the Delta IV Medium + (5.4) launch lift performance as a function of orbital altitude.
The booster has a 5-m diameter fairing with four additional strap-on motors.
A lower bound (or optimistic) minimum estimate OF $9.8 million per ton (in FY 2010
dollars) was computed based on a representative cost of $160 million per launch (in FY 2002
dollars) or $188 million per launch in FY 2010 dollars for a Delta IV Heavy vehicle with a
maximum lift of approximately 19,240 kg to 330 km altitude at a 45- to 55-degree orbital
inclination performance.34 Figure E-6 illustrates the Delta IV Heavy launch lift performance as a
function of orbital altitude. The Delta IV Heavy is configured with a 5-m diameter fairing with
two additional core common boosters as strap-on motors to the primary launch vehicle.
32The launches will be from Launch Complex 41 at Cape Canaveral Air Force Station [in] Florida. The four
payloads are the Radiation Belt Storm Probes mission [with a launch in 2011;] the Magnetospheric Multiscale
mission [with a launch in 2014;] and the Tracking and Data Relay Satellites (TDRS) K and L (or TDRS-K and
TDRS-L) missions [planned for a 2012 and 2013 launches, respectively.] See NASA contract release: C09-011,
March 16, 2009.
33See NASA contract release: C09-011, March 16, 2009.
34The launch services cost and performance information for this Delta IV Heavy and Medium class of vehicles is
from S. J. Isakowitz, J. B. Hopkins, J. P. Hopkins, Jr., 2004, International Reference Guide to Space Launch Systems,
4th edition, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
E-41
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
FIGURE E-5 Delta IV medium + (5.4) LEO launch lift capability. SOURCE: S. J. Isakowitz, J. B. Hopkins, J. P.
Hopkins, Jr. 2004. International Reference Guide to Space Launch Systems, 4th edition, American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics.
FIGURE E-6 Delta IV heavy LEO launch lift capability. SOURCE: S. J. Isakowitz, J. B. Hopkins, J. P. Hopkins, Jr.
2004. International Reference Guide to Space Launch Systems, 4th edition, American Institute of Aeronautics and
Astronautics.
E-42
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The minimum and maximum estimates of cost per total mass lift to LEO were used for
computing launch service costs to attain FOC of the total number of SBI satellites required for
the constellation. Once FOC is reached and assuming an average life of 7 years for each SBI
satellite, replacement launches will be required after FY 2025.
Given the forecast increase in U. S. demand for space systems launch and the emerging
use of launch sites other than Vandenberg Air Force Base and Cape Canaveral and use of classes
of boosters other than EELVs, the committee reduced the minimum cost of total mass lift to LEO
estimate based on the representative market price for launch services cited by SpaceX for the
Falcon 9 Block 2 (see Figure E-7).35
FIGURE E-7 Falcon 9 Block 2 LEO launch lift capability. SOURCE: Space X “Falcon 9 User’s Guide,” SCM
2009-010 Revision 1, Figure 4.1, “Falcon 9 Block 2 Performance to Low Earth Orbit (Cape Canaveral).
After FOC, the committee set the launch cost per ton for SBI replacement launches in the
20-yr life cycle period at the projected minimum and maximum values after FY 2025. These
values reflected the larger market supply of smaller launch vehicles, such as SpaceX
Corporation’s Falcon 9 boosters launched from several different U. S. sites as viable candidates
beyond the Delta IV and Atlas V expendable vehicles launched from Cape Canaveral and
Vandenberg Air Force Base.
The minimum cost of $8.4 million per ton is based on the standard launch services prices
for Falcon 9 and includes additional 8 percent for reflight insurance. It pertains to a booster with
35Cost and performance information is from SpaceX, 2009, “Falcon 9 User’s Guide, SCM 2009-010 Revision 1,
Figure 4.1, “Falcon 9 Block 2 Performance to Low Earth Orbit (Cape Canaveral).
E-43
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
a maximum lift capability to LEO of approximately 7,200 kg after subtracting the mass
estimated for the payload adaptor along with a 10 percent additional mass margin.36
In this post-FOC time frame, the maximum cost was set at $13.9 million per ton, or
approximately 10 percent less than the previously stated value of $15.5 million per ton. This
value is based on use of an assumed mix of Delta IV or Atlas V class vehicles and Falcon 9
boosters needed to keep up with SBI satellite replacement competitive launch demands.
SBI Constellation Cost and Affordability Observations
Space-based interceptors are a potentially attractive option for boost-phase intercept
because they are not constrained by geography to being located close to the target missile. In
addition, their accelerations and velocities are not constrained by the atmosphere, so in theory
they could have longer reaches than surface- and air-based interceptors.
Those potential operational advantages are offset, however, by a number of drawbacks.
First, placing mass into LEO is very expensive, $8.400 and $15,500 per kilogram (in FY 2010
dollars). This makes total launch lift mass the dominant design criterion for space-based
systems. For example, mass constraints limit the ability to exploit the lack of atmosphere to
increase the reach of the interceptors. In fact, the committee found that the total mass in orbit
was minimized when accelerations and flyout velocities were less than those assumed in almost
all of U. S. surface-based interceptors. Second, the orbital motion of the satellites and the
rotation of Earth result in requirements for very large numbers of satellites to ensure that at least
one would be close enough to intercept a single missile before it achieved enough velocity to
deliver its munitions to the United States. This coverage requirement, in turn, results in
constellations with masses that are between 650 and 2,000 SBI satellites.37 The total launch lift
mass to orbit of even the lower end of the constellation size calls for a significant effort and
would require at least a threefold increase in the current launch capacity of the United States.
GMD Evolved CONUS-Based Systems
The GMD-E cost estimates were based on the committee’s recommended interceptor
baseline design that would be half the size and weight of the current GBI and should be designed
to be either silo emplaced at a CONUS-based site in the Northeast or, as described in the next
section, to be carried in a canister on a transporter/erector/launcher (TEL) at a prepositioned
fixed site or sites in Europe.
The committee recommended that the additional site in CONUS should be activated in
upstate New York or Maine. For both CONUS and forward-based GMD-E missiles, the new
interceptor’s KV should be designed around a 30-cm-diameter two color LWIR sensor with an
additional visible band to detect targets as far away as 3,000 km. It is estimated that this sensor
with a blow-down-cooled 256 × 256 three-color focal plane array cued by SBIRS high and/or
36Cost and performance information was extracted from Space X “Falcon 9 User’s Guide,, SCM 2009-010
Revision 1, Figure 4.1, “Falcon 9 Block 2 Performance to Low Earth Orbit (Cape Canaveral).
37The Case 1 SBI satellite constellation size of 1,000 for the boost-phase intercept mission should be considered
optimistic against solid-propellant ICBMs. If more realistic geographical scenarios are considered, ICBMs would
have to be intercepted sooner than 5 sec before burnout, resulting in an increase in the total number of interceptors
and total system mass. For example, the number of interceptors and total mass would increase by about 25 percent
if the constellation were designed to defend the United States against Iran. The effects of more realistic scenarios
are less pronounced against liquid-propellant ICBMs, because they burn longer and accelerate more rapidly at the
end of their burns.
E-44
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
forward-based X-band radars can observe the threat complex for as long as 300 sec with
adequate and ever increasing signal-to-noise ratio. The committee estimates that a KV with the
features described below will have a wet mass of 106-110 kg and a total divert capability of 600
m/sec. The GMD-E interceptor and KV must be designed to receive uplinks at any time during
fly-out and to downlink what the KV sees any time after shroud removal without vehicle
hardware or orientation constraints, preferably at X-band using one or more of the X-band radars
that has the interceptor in view for both up- and downlinks. The KV should have a battery
operating time in excess of 700 sec after boost, and the blow-down cooling should take the focal
plane and immediately adjacent optical structure to 100 K when the sensor is uncapped. With the
focal plane heat sunk, the sensor optics may warm up slowly from that point as the interceptor
closes on the target complex. The KV should include an inflatable kill enhancement “net”
similar to that used on ERIS to deal with any objects tethered close to the threat warhead.
One of the key assumptions driving the nonrecurring and recurring estimates for the
CONUS-based GMD-E booster was leveraging the previous MDA Kinetic Energy Intercept
(KEI) program and take advantage of relevant heritage designs and MDA’s sunk investment cost
of $5.1 billion (in FY-2010 dollars) expended on work performed under this now cancelled
program of record.38
Our evolved GMD interceptor’s proposed design would use a smaller two-stage
interceptor with a total burn time less than a third that of the existing GBI carrying a larger more
capable KV. It would also require adding a third missile field site in the U. S. Northeastern and a
fourth site in the U. S. North Central states together with additional X- band radars to protect the
eastern United States and Canada against Iranian threats.
The 20-yr LCC range estimates for this CONUS-based GMD-E system are summarized
in Table E-25.
TABLE E-25 Estimated LCC for CONUS-Based GMD-E System Total (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Development 3.3 4.7
Procurement 5.8 9.6
Force quantity buy Two missile field sites 50 interceptors each (30 operational missiles + test
assets)
MILCONa 2.4 2.4
20-yr O&S 7.6 8.6
Total 19.1 25.3
aThe LCC for a CONUS-based Evolved GMD system includes an estimate for the construction cost of Northeast
and North Central missile fields and other infrastructure facilities at these two sites.
Forward-Based GMD-E Systems
As part of the committee’s evaluation of the gain in effectiveness to defend against
ballistic missile attacks from our allies within Europe and others, it estimated the 20-yr LCC of a
forward-deployed, evolved GMD transportable interceptor system located in Poland as a hedging
strategy alternative to the land-based SM-3 Block IIB interceptor previously described a previous
section, “Aegis SM-3 Block IIB.” The 20-yr LCC of a forward-based GMD-E interceptor
system is provided below as Table E-26.
38The booster configuration developed on the KEI program went through successful ground firing of the first-
stage motor, and the second-stage motor was ready to fire just before the program was terminated in late 2009.
E-45
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-26 Estimated LCC for Forward-Based GMD-E System Total (FY 2010 dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Development 2.8 3.9
Procurement 1.6 2.3
Force quantity buy One land-based site in Europe
MILCON None required None required
20-yr O&S 2.0 3.0
Total 6.4 9.2
LIFE CYCLE COST DETAILS PROGRAMS OF RECORD SYSTEMS
GMD Systems
Relevant Systems Investment Costs
Table E-27 lists the GMD system total program investment costs (i. e., budget) expended
through FY 2009 of approximately $34 billion (in FY 2010 constant dollars).39 In the 1993 time
frame, the primary mission of the boost interceptor and the NMD programs was to develop a
defensive system that could “intercept incoming ballistic missile warheads outside Earth’s
atmosphere [exoatmosphere] and destroy them by force of the impact.”40 This mission and the
programs that followed have since evolved, beginning with the GMD incremental block
development of a midcourse interceptor system in 2002. During this 8-yr period from FY 2002
through FY 2009, the MDA total annual investment was approximately $22 billion, which in
addition to program block development included the production of 40 three-stage GBI
operational and test interceptors. The average annual investment for the GMD system and the
BPI program during this time frame was approximately $2.7 billion.
TABLE E-27 GMD System Investment Costs Through FY 2009 (FY 2010 dollars)
Total Investment Average Annual Investment
Cost Element Program Time Frame (billions) (millions)
Boost-phase interceptor 1993-1999 1.4 227
NMD DEM/VAL 1995-2001 8.7 1,444
BMDS interceptor 2003-2009 1.9 265
GMD block development 2002-2009 21.7 2,716
Total investment 33.7
NOTE: The total program acquisition (RDT&E and procurement) investment sunk costs for the current GMD
system and previous predecessor system expended through FY 2009 are based on the sum of the fiscal year actuals
reported from the FY 2012 MDA FYDP PB justification sheets submitted in February 2011 and on previous MDA
(formerly BMDO) annual PB justification sheets. For the other interceptor and sensor systems, these same
references cited are the basis for the other interceptor and sensor system sunk investment cost calculations, and
where applicable, from the other military services listed in the tables in this appendix.
System Acquisition Costs
Table E-28 provides the AUPC estimates for the three-stage GBI of $70.2 million, which
includes the EKV at close to $30 million, which is 42 percent of the total interceptor cost and
also includes the booster avionics module and integration, assembly, and checkout costs per
39For system comparison purposes, all the costs provided in this appendix, as well as in Appendix J, are
normalized to FY 2010 constant dollar, using the base year FY 2010 OSD inflation rate index issued on December
11, 2009.
40See MDA, Ground-Based Midcourse Defense (GBD) Validation of Operational Concept (VOC), Chapter 2.0,
December 12, 2002.
E-46
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-28 GMD Three-Stage GBI Average Unit Procurement Costs (FY 2010 million dollars)a
GBI Cost Element AUPC
EKV 29.8
Boost stack 19.8
Booster avionics modules 6.5
Integration, assembly, test, and checkout 4.1 Next five GBIsb
Total cost 70.2 86.5
aMDA provided the total cost estimate for five GBIs, which it was assumed were in FY 2010 dollars. (“MDA
Ground-Based Midcourse Defense Response to NAS Cost Questions,” August 12, 2010.
bMDA also noted that the purchase of refurbishment parts and flight test rotation kits impacted many suppliers.
As a result, the GMDS program allocated $81.8 million (in FY 2010 dollars) specifically to value added vendor
preservation by procuring long-lead items for the next five GBIs. MDA allocated $86.5 million, an upper bound
projected AUPC estimate for the next five GBIs, in the budget evenly across this next production buy.
system. With regard to the EKV and in addition to the procurement of new three-stage GBIs, the
FY 2011 MDA FYDP PB listed a separate procurement of the capability enhancement-II (CE-2)
EKVs at a higher average unit cost of $39 million (also in FY 2010 dollars) for a quantity buy of
seven. The enhanced EKV addresses the parts “obsolescence issues and provides additional
processor throughput to support systemwide [advanced] discrimination capabilities.”41
For forward projections of additional quantities of three-stage GBIs beyond the budget
committed in the FY 2011 FYDP, the committee assumed the AUPC estimate of $70.2 million
as a realistic lower bound estimate along with an upper bound estimate of $86.5 million.
System O&S Costs
Table E-29 lists the average annual sustainment or total operating and support costs for
the GMD system at $290 million (in FY 2010 dollars) located at both FGA and VAFB.42 MDA
is currently pursuing “a competitive development and sustainment contract (DSC) for future
development; fielding; test[ing]; systems engineering, integration and configuration
management; equipment manufacturing and refurbishment; training; and operations and
sustainment support for the GMD system and associated support facilities.”43 Specifically, the
sustainment portion of the contract includes base operations maintenance support costs, which
includes (1) “monitoring, diagnostics, and maintenance of fielded ground-based midcourse
defense components,” (2) “continued development and validation of maintenance procedures,”
(3) “tracking of repair parts stock levels,” and (4) performing maintenance on a 24/7/365 basis at
VAFB, FGA, and the MDIOC.44 Sustainment costs are also for upgrading and maintaining the
security system at FGA and “developing a competitive logistics acquisition strategy for follow-
41
See MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit R-2,
RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0603882C: Ballistic Missile Defense Mid-Course Segment, February 2010.
42Until FY 2008, GMD BPI program RDT&E annual budgets from FY 2002 thru FY 2007 included a mix of
sustainment or operations and support efforts as part of total costs, which were not separately identified within
specific program element line item numbers and/or block development projects.
43See MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit R-2,
RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0603882C: Ballistic Missile Defense Mid-Course Segment, February 2010.
44Ibid.
E-47
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-29 GMD System Average Annual O&S Cost (FY 2010 million dollars)
Average Annual
O&S Cost FY 2010 Distribution by Cost Element (%)
O&S Cost Elements through FY 2015 MDA Contractor Army
Unit level manpower 53 0 21 79
Unit operations 4 0 0 100
Maintenance 59 0 100 0
Sustaining support 153 37 61 2
Indirect support 20 100 0 0
Total 290 26 57 17
NOTE: The annual O&S costs for the GMD program were provided by MDA in then-year dollars from FY 2010
through FY 2027 across the OSD CAPE cost elements. Also listed is a percentage breakdown by cost element and
total O&S costs of the portion of MDA funds for sustaining and indirect support, MDA contractor funds from its
RDT&E budget and Army funds for unit-level manpower and unit operations. An average was taken over the FY
2011 FYDP through FY 2015, and the average annual costs are expressed in FY 2010 constant year dollars.
SOURCE: “MDA Ground-Based Midcourse Defense Response to NAS Cost Questions,” August 12, 2010.
on maintenance.”45 The average annual GMD O&S cost for a GBI force of 30 operational
missiles is approximately $9.7 million per year (in constant FY 2010 dollars).
System Life Cycle Costs
From FY 2010 forward, the GMD system LCC range estimates for development,
procurement, and 20-yr O&S are listed in Table E-30. The total estimate from FY 2010 forward
of approximately $19.3 billion includes the following:
TABLE E-30 GMD System Total LCC Estimate (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 10.6 14.5
Procurement 10.6 14.5
Force quantity buyb 12 GBIs
MILCONc 1.10 1.10
20-yr O&Sd 5.8 5.8
Total 16.4 20.3
aThe FY 2012 MDA GMD system program RDT&E budget for development and procurement was not broken
down by MDA. The total acquisition cost range estimate listed above consists of the total requested funds from FY
2010 through FY 2016 of $6.8 billion plus costs projected forward for the (1) minimum estimate for another 4 years
through FY 2020 of $3.9 billion and (2) maximum estimate for another 8 years through FY 2024 of $7.7 billion
based on the same average projected annual budget level of $965 million as the FY 2012 FYDP.
bIn the FY 2012 FYDP PB, MDA requested budget for the interceptor force quantity buy from FY 2010 forward
through FY 2016 of 12, which consists of one upgraded and fielded GBI and eleven new GBIs (numbers 34 through
44).
cThe funds for the actual construction of the 14 silos and related facilities for Missile Field 2 are listed under the
MDA FY-12 FYDP PB MILCON budget.
dThe total O&S cost over a 20-yr service life is based on an average annual sustainment costs for the GMD system
estimated at $290 million (in FY-2010 dollars) for the missile fields, silos and interceptors located at both Ft. Greely
and VAFB.
45See MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit R-2,
RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0603882C: Ballistic Missile Defense Mid-Course Segment, February 2010.
E-48
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The requested funding for the MDA FY 2012 FYDP PB RDT&E budget for the
GMD program of $6.8 billion (excluding sustainment funds) from FY 2010 through
FY 2016 to procure additional three-stage boosters configured with enhanced KVs for
completing the buildup and retrofit of existing interceptors to an objective operational
force of 30 GBIs. In addition, the $6.7 billion budget includes funds for the
procurement of launch site components (i. e., silos and silo interface vaults), launch
support systems (e. g., command launch equipment), in-flight interceptor
communications system data terminals, a communications network, an external
systems interface, test exercisers, fire controls, and so on for Missile Field 2 at FGA.
The sustainment funding for the missile fields, silos, command and control
operations, and maintenance for ensuring 30 operationally available interceptors and
additional test interceptors will be in place at both FGA and VAFB.
Aegis SM-3 Systems
Since both the SM-3 Block IIA codevelopment and SM-3 Block IIB or Aegis Ashore
programs are relatively new programs of record that were covered earlier, this section is limited
to providing a summary of the total Navy and MDA Aegis system investment costs through FY
2009, the average unit procurement costs of SM-3 Blocks IA and IB, and a discussion of
projected sustainment costs of these ship-based missiles.
Relevant System Investment Costs
Table E-31 lists the total investment cost of approximately $17 billion and the average
annual investment costs for earlier and current BMD Aegis programs from FY 1964 through FY
2009. The table includes program investments beginning with the initial Navy-funded
investments (shaded rows) in the Aegis Weapon System program consisting of both the
development of the SM-2 (RIM-66C) missile and the AN/SPY-1A radar beginning in FY 1964
and continuing forward with SM-2 Block I through IV program development efforts through FY
2002. (This table also includes Aegis BMD software development costs.) In parallel, originally
BMDO and now MDA continued parallel program investments in initially developing sea-based
and Navy theater area ballistic missiles beginning in FY 1993, followed by the procurement of
SM-2 Blocks IV and V interceptors as well as vertical launch system (VLS) canisters in the FY
1999 through FY 2001 time frame.
TABLE E-31Aegis System Investment Costs Through FY 2009 (FY 2010 dollars)
Total Investment Average Annual Investment
Cost Element Program Time Frame (billions) (millions)
Navy Aegis Weapon System 1964-1985 2.5 115
(RIM-66C SM-2 and AN/SPY-1A)
Navy Aegis SM-2 Blocks I to IV 1987-2002 1.2 140
Sea-based Navy theater area 1993-2002 6.2 686
TBMD DEM/VAL and EMD
SM-2 Blocks IVA and V and VLS 1999-2001 0.3 93
canisters procurement
BMD Aegis block development 2002-2009 6.9 865
BMD Aegis procurement 2009 0.1 103
Total Navy and MDA investment 16.9
E-49
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
The next-generation SM-3 program was initiated in FY 2002 with the BMD Aegis block
development program, which continues through the FY 2012 FYDP along with the parallel
procurement of the first 71 SM-3 Block I A interceptors manufactured using MDA RDT&E
funds beginning in FY-2009. According to the MDA FY 2012 FYDP budget, 61 of these
interceptors are expected in the inventory by the end of FY 2010. The first 34 SM-3 Block IB
interceptors are currently being produced using MDA RDT&E funds beginning in FY 2011.
System Acquisition Costs
From FY 2010 through FY 2016, the BMD Aegis RDT&E budget of approximately $7.5
billion continues, with the incremental development of Block 3.6.1 for the PAA Phase 1
midcourse and terminal layer defense and of Block 4.0.1 for improved radar tracking accuracy
and RF discrimination, an improved SM-3 Block IB kinetic warhead, a Block 5.0 Aegis
modernization program, a Block 5.0.1 improved terminal defense capability, and other activities.
As reported in the MDA FY 2011 FYDP budget, Table E-32 provides the cumulative
AUPC estimate of $9.6 million for SM-3 Block IA interceptors based on a total quantity of 41
manufactured over two recent annual production lots, where FY 2009 costs are based on actual
budget expenditures and FY 2010 on approved budgets. SM-3 Block IA production is scheduled
to be completed around the second quarter of FY 2012.
Table E-32 also lists the cumulative AUPC estimate of $9.3 million for each SM-3 Block
1B based on a total buy quantity of 290 produced over the annual lot quantities listed below
beginning with 8 in FY 2011, followed by 66 in FY 2012 and continuing on at 72 a year from
FY 2013 through FY 2015. Further details on the computed cost improvement, or learning curve
calculations, for SM-3 Block IB missile production are provided in the final main section.
TABLE E-32 Aegis SM-3 Average Unit Procurement Costs (FY 2010 million dollars)
Cumulative Annual Lot Average Unit
Average Unit Cost Total Quantity Fiscal Year Quantities Cost per Lot
SM-3 Block IA 9.6 41 FY 2009 23 9.3
(last two lots) FY2010 18 10.0
SM-3 Block IB 9.3 290 FY 2011 8 11.6
FY 2012 66 10.3
FY 2013 72 9.4
FY 2014 72 8.8
FY 2015 72 8.5
NOTE: As stated, the costs listed came from the MDA FY 2011 FDYP budget details. (DOD, 2010, Department of
Defense Fiscal Year (FY) 2011 President's Budget Missile Defense Agency Justification Book, Volume 2c,
Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, Defense-Wide–0400,) The committee elected to use these costs rather
than the data provided by MDA in the “AB Cost Estimates Supporting MDA Cost,” presentation to the committee,
March 1, 2010, because the latter lacked the AUPC estimates by annual lot production quantity to allow comparison
with the other missile systems.
System O&S Costs
With regard to Aegis BMD system O&S costs, MDA and the “Aegis BMD [program]
negotiated agreements with the U. S. Navy for the [operation] and maintenance of BMD systems
E-50
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
onboard U. S. Navy ships.”46 In the fall of 2005, the U. S. Navy (IWS3A) and the MDA BMD
Aegis program office signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) that established an O&S
cost share for the sustainment of SM-3 Block IA missiles and the AWS BMD 3.6.1 Aegis ships,
with the U. S. Navy being responsible for supplying funds for unit-level operations and indirect
support personnel, contractor logistics support, support equipment, and staffing as the lead
service project office.
MDA’s portion of the O&S cost share is currently based on support efforts leveraged off
existing contracts and infrastructure. In the FY 2011 FYDP budget, MDA specifically requested
SM-3 missile sustainment funds of $64 million (in FY 2010 dollars) for O&S activities providing
the U. S. Navy with (1) “in-service engineering support,” (2) “[operations] and maintenance
training for Aegis BMD ship crews,” (3) “logistics support including technical manuals, spares,”
etc., (4) “reliability, maintainability and availability” (RM&A) analyses products, (5) “leadership
and engineering/technical support to conduct Aegis Combat Systems Assessments,” and
(6) responses “to fleet issues related to Aegis BMD installations, BMD operations and BMD
[emergent] events.”47 In addition, the MDA BMD Aegis program office provided the committee
with a set of annual O&S cost estimates from FY 2010 through FY 2015 for the SM-3 Block IA
and the AWS BMD Block 3.6.1 systems and the SM-3 Block IB and AWS BMD 4.0.1 systems.
The MDA BMD Aegis program office provided a set of annual O&S costs from FY
2010 through FY 2015 similar to its GMD GBI O&S cost element breakdown.48 Table E-33 lists
the total average annual O&S cost estimates for the SM-3 Block IA and AWS BMD 3.6.1
combination, which over that time frame represents the sustainment, on average, of 40 missiles
and related AWS sustainment of 14 Aegis.49 Since the BMD Aegis schedule as of November
2009 displayed full-rate production for SM-3 Block IB missiles continuing through the middle of
FY 2013, the committee elected to compute the average annual O&S costs for this SM-3 block
of missiles and corresponding AWS BMD 4.0.1 Aegis ship assets beginning in FY 2013 through
FY 2015 under more fully deployed steady-state conditions. Table E-33 also lists the average
annual O&S cost estimates for SM-3 Block IB and AWS BMD 4.0.1 systems, which is based on
the same MDA sustainment roles and responsibilities as the previous SM-3 Block IA missiles
and AWS BMD 3.6.1 systems. Based on this same premise, the average annual O&S costs over
the FY 2103 through FY 2015 time frame represent MDA’s sustainment of 102 Block IB
missiles and 12 Aegis ships.50
46See MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit R-2,
RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0603882C: Ballistic Missile Defense Mid-Course Segment, February 2010.
47Ibid.
48MDA, “AB Cost Estimates Supporting MDA Cost,” presentation to the committee, March 1, 2010.
49The cost per missile and per ship is based on the Aegis program office estimate of the average MDA O&S cost
per SM-3 Block IB missile of approximately $0.25 million per year. The average MDA O&S cost per ship for AWS
BMD 3.6.1 of approximately $0.60 million per year does not include the cost of this AWS block installation,
checkout, and testing on the Aegis ships which was completed before FY 2010.
50The average annual O&S cost per Aegis ship for this AWS Block upgrade is significantly higher than that for
previous block upgrades since it also includes the integration, checkout, and testing on the ships concurrent with
the deployment of SM-3 Block IB missiles.
E-51
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-33 Aegis SM-3 System Average Annual O&S Cost (FY 2010 million dollars)a
O&S Cost Elements FY 2010 Through FY 2015 Average
SM-3 Block IA
Initial spares 1.7
Engineering support 1.5
Missile surveillance 1.0
Recertification 4.4
PHS&Tb 0.3
Fleet/RM&A supportc 0.3
Transportation 0.1
Software 0.7
Total 9.9
AWS BMD 3.6.1
AWS upgrades 7.3
Training 1.3
Total 8.6
SM-3 Block IB
Initial spares 20.2
Engineering support 1.8
Missile surveillance 1.2
PHS&Tb 0.3
Fleet/RM&A supportc 0.3
Transportation 0.8
Software 0.8
Total 25.5
AWS BMD 4.0.1
Test ship under way 14.0
AWS upgrades 47.3
LRS&T equipment 5.4
Engage equipment 5.4
Total 72.0
NOTE: The average annual cost of SM-3 Block IA and AWS BMD 3.6.1 is for FY 2010 through FY 2015 and that
of SM-3 Block IB and AWS BMD 4.0.1 is for FY 2013 through FY 2015.
a Since an MOU is not currently in place for the SM-3 Block 1B missiles and AWS BMD 4.0.1 assets for Aegis
ships, the MDA program office based the estimates for these two tables on the assumption that the U. S. Navy will
agree to the same sustainment roles and responsibilities and an O&S cost share similar to that for SM-3 Block IA
and AWS BMD 3.6.1. Since low rate initial production for the SM-3 Block IB missiles is currently under way, this
set of O&S costs were reported at an 80 percent level of confidence.
bPHS&T, packaging, handling, shipping and transporting, the SM-3 missiles.
cRM&A, reliability, maintainability and availability.
THAAD Systems
Relevant System Investment Costs
The THAAD system investment began with BMDO funding a demonstration and
validation (DEM/VAL) program beginning in FY 1992 and continued through an engineering,
manufacturing, and development (EMD) through FY 2003 for the missile system, which includes
the tactical support group (TSG), launcher, and ground-based radar. Table E-34 lists the total
annual investment of over $16 billion in the THAAD system from FY 1992 through FY 2009.
This investment includes the average annual investment over the first two phases of the
development program through preplanned product improvement of $872 million over this initial
12-yr time frame, followed by the MDA THAAD block development program continuing
E-52
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
through the next 6 years from FY 2004 through FY 2009 at an annual investment of over $1.1
billion per year, which is approximately 25 percent higher.
TABLE E-34 THAAD System Investment Costs Through FY-2009 (FY 2010 dollars)
Total Investment Average Annual Investment
Program Time Frame (billions) (millions)
DEM/VAL EMD 1992-2003 9.6 872
(included ground-based radar)
Block development 2004-2009 6.7 1,123
Procurement 2009 0.1 106
Total investment 16.4
System Acquisition Costs
According to the MDA FY 2012 FYDP PB, the THAAD program is continuing block
development and concurrently expending procurement funds first initiated in FY 2009 for LRIP.
Even though the first 50 THAAD interceptors were produced using RDT&E funds, the average
missile unit costs are based on reported annual procurement budgets and lot quantity buys
beginning in FY-2010 and continuing at the rate of between 65 and 68 per year from FY 2011
through FY 2016.
Table E-35 displays THAAD system AUPC costs for the missiles of $11.2 million based
on a total production quantity of for 431, for launchers of $6.7 million based on a total quantity
of 60, and for TFCC Tactical Support Groups (TSGs) of $10.7 million based on a total quantity
of 18. The missile AUPC estimates provided by the MDA Director of Estimating (DOE)
THAAD cost team assume that there will be no production breaks, no design changes, no
unforeseen cost overruns, and no cost, technical, or schedule problems during full-rate
production.51 For the THAAD missile, the MDA DOE THAAD cost team assumed a learning
curve of 93 percent. This is consistent with the committee’s detailed calculations of the
computed cost improvement, or learning curve calculations, for the THAAD missile production
that are provided in the section “THAAD.”
TABLE E-35 THAAD Average Unit Procurement Costs (FY 2010 million dollars)
Cumulative Average Unit Cost Total Quantity
THAAD interceptor 11.2 431
Launcher 6.7 60
TSG 10.7 18
The estimates for the launcher and TFCC TSG units are fixed-price estimates with no
cost improvement or learning curve savings over the quantity produced. According to the MDA
FY 2011 FYDP budget, TSG average unit costs are based on a production rate of four per year
from FY 2013 through FY 2015. The average cost for procuring a THAAD battery, without the
AN/TPY-2 terminal mode radar, ranges from a current estimate of $695 million to a projected
$530 million with the continued interceptor lot buys through the FY 2015 time frame.
51MDA. 2010. “DOE Cost Estimates Supporting NAS: THAAD Cost Team,” February 26. Due to the delay in
the start of production, these quantities are slightly higher than the total procurement quantities of 427 missiles, 54
launchers, and 15 TSGs requested in the MDA FY 2012 FYDP PB through FY 2016.
E-53
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
System O&S Costs
According to the MDA FY 2011 FYDP budget details, sustainment funds are for
providing THAAD batteries with the “logistical support to field, operate, maintain, repair and
replenish the THAAD weapon system as it [is] fielded to the Army. [It includes funds for]
contractor logistics support (CLS) technicians responsible for field and sustainment maintenance,
including the repair and supply chain management of the required spares and repair parts.”52 The
specific CLS annual cost for the THAAD radar software maintenance for implementing the
software maintenance plan required for postdeployment software sustainment (PDSS) is covered
later in this appendix in the section after next, “AN/TPY-2 Radar Systems,” as part of the
average O&S cost estimate for the AN/TPY-2 radar.53
Table E-36 summarizes the THAAD system total annual O&S costs with subtotals
reflecting the MDA and assumed U. S. Army projected shares as an average estimate over the FY
2010 through FY 2015 time frame. The table also breaks out the subtotals by O&S cost element.
TABLE E-36 THAAD System Average Annual O&S Cost (FY 2010 million dollars)
FY 2010 Through FY 2015 Average Annual
Cost Element O&S Cost
Sustaining supporta 20.5
GFE and support equipment modification kits replacementb 1.3
Logistics supportc 17.0
Phase adaptive approachd 93.3
MDA subtotal 132.1
Petroleum, oil, and lubricantse 0.8
GFE spares, repair parts, depot maintenancef 13.4
Indirect supportg 7.8
Military personnelh 45.9
Army subtotal (see NOTE) 68.0
Total 200.0
NOTE: The total annual O&S cost estimates and the breakdown by cost elements were provided by the MDA DOE
THAAD cost team from FY 2010 through FY 2015. (See MDA, DOE THAAD Cost Team, “DOE Cost Estimates,”
presentation to the committee, February 26, 2010. A separate discussion of the AN/TPY-2 forward-based radar
recurring unit cost and annual O&S costs was discussed in Appendix I.). The average annual cost in FY 2010
dollars is summarized by O&S cost elements for both MDA and the assumed U. S. Army portion of the sustainment
not covered under the MDA FY 2011 FYDP budget for the program element for the BMD terminal defense
segment. The sustaining support cost element covers the annual O&S estimate for the interceptor, TFCC and
launcher. The O&S costs assume that the full complement of 48 interceptors, 6 launchers, and 2 TFCC units needed
for fielding a total of 9 THAAD batteries will be fully deployed by FY 2015. The estimates are based on the MDA
DOE THAAD cost team’s projections for this fiscal year. The total average O&S cost per year is approximately
$38.7 million per year (in FY 2010 dollars), which does not include the O&S cost for the AN/TPY-2 terminal mode
radar. The GFE and support equipment modification kits replacement costs cover the TFCC and launcher.
a Sustaining support costs cover the interceptor; TFCC and launcher and weapon system engineering; integrated
logistics support; system testing; and program management.
bThe cost of GFE, support equipment, and modification kit replacements covers TFCC and the launcher.
c Logistics support costs cover the interceptor, TFCC, and the launcher.
52See MDA, FY-2011 FYDP Research, Development, Test&Evaluation, President’s Budget, Exhibit R-2,
RDT&E Budget Item Justification, BA 4: Advanced Component Development&Prototypes (ACD&P), PE
0603882C: Ballistic Missile Defense Mid-Course Segment, February 2010.
53In the THAAD FY 2010 sustainment plans, Lockheed-Martin provides 100 percent of the CLS responsible for
fielding two battery systems and sustaining maintenance of all the hardware. Raytheon provides the CLS for the
AN/TYP-2 radar and associated PPU.
E-54
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
dThe MDA DOE THAAD cost team added this cost element for the Phased Adaptive Approach ( PAA ) even
though the funds were not defined in its briefing to the committee. This PAA cost element was also not separately
identified in funded elements reported in the MDA FY 2011 FYDP budget under the program element for the BMD
terminal defense segment for THAAD.
eU. S. Army POL cost estimates are for the ground vehicles transporting the TFCC, launcher, and THAAD battery
common and peculiar equipment.
fU. S. Army O&S cost estimates are for procuring GFE, spares, repair, and parts for performing depot maintenance
for the TFCC and the launcher.
gU. S. Army indirect support costs are for sustainment of the entire THAAD battery suite of equipment, except for
the AN/TPY-2 radar and PPUs.
hU. S. Army military personnel costs are for operating and maintaining the entire THAAD battery suite of
equipment except for the AN/TPY-2 radar and the PPU.
System Life Cycle Costs
From FY-2010 forward, the THAAD system LCC range estimates for development,
procurement, and 20-yr O&S costs, between $ 14 billion and $ 16 billion are listed in Table E-37.
The total estimate from FY 2010 forward includes the following:
The requested funding for FY 2012 FYDP PB from FY 2010 through FY 2016 for the
THAAD development program, at approximately $ 2. 5 billion, and the procurement
program, at $ 5. 2 billion, to procure 427 additional THAAD interceptors, launchers,
and TSG workstations by FY 2016.
The sustainment funding for operating and maintaining nine THAAD batteries over a
20-yr service life.
Consistent with the MDA FY 2011 and FY 2012 FYDP PB funding, the development
and procurement cost estimates for AN/TPY-2 terminal mode radars for the THAAD systems as
well as the THAAD battery O&S costs for sustaining these radars over 20 years are not included
here; they are, however, covered separately later in this appendix ( see Table E-42 ).
TABLE E-37 THAAD System Total LCC Estimate ( FY 2010 billion dollars )
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 4. 0 5. 4
Procurementb 5. 8 6. 6
buyc Force quantity 471 missiles 527 missiles
MILCON None required None required
Sd 20-yr O&4. 0 4. 0
Total 13. 8 16. 0
aThe THAAD development cost range estimate of $ 4. 0 billion to $ 5. 4 billion is based on projecting the FY 2012
MDA THAAD system development total requested funds from FY 2010 through FY 2016, $ 2. 5 billion, forward
through the FY 2020 to FY 2024 time frame at the same continued annual average expenditure rate of
approximately $ 360 million for at least 4 more and up to 8 moret years. The additional MDA ( and possibly Army )
RDT&E funding is assumed to continue block development improvements and the sustaining engineering necessary
until nine fully configured and operational THAAD batteries are in place and the total operations, support, and
material sustainment role is fully transitioned over to the Army.
bThe THAAD procurement cost range estimate of approximately $ 5. 8 billion up to $ 6. 6 billion is based on the FY
2012 MDA THAAD system program procurement total requested funds from FY 2010 through FY 2016 of $ 5. 3
billion and $ 0. 5 billion to $ 1. 3 billion of additional funds after FY 2016 for funding the procurement of at least 44
and at most of 100 additional THAAD missiles plus 6 launchers, 2 TSG workstations and any additional peculiar
support equipment and other hardware necessary to fully configure nine Army batteries.
E-55
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
cThe total force buy quantity of between 461 and 527 THAAD missiles will cover the total operational quantity
needed for fully configuring nine Army batteries and the expendable assets to cover THAAD missile flight tests and
operational readiness training exercises necessary from FY 2011 through the FY 2016 time frame.
dThe committee estimated the THAAD system O&S annual average cost at $ 200 million ( in FY 2010 dollars ).
The cost consists of both the MDA and Army portions for sustaining and fielding nine deployed batteries with each
battery fully configured with 48 interceptors, 6 launchers, and 2 TFCC units.
PAC-3 Systems
Relevant System Investment Costs
Table E-38 summarizes the total DOD and Army investment of close to $ 16 billion from
FY 1983 through FY 2009 beginning with the PAC-3 development program and continuing
forward for 21 years to FY 2003 at an average investment of $ 183 million per year. Since FY
2004, the investment in PAC-3 was and still is primarily the responsibility of the Army
( highlighted in green ), including the commitment of procurement funding for producing a total
of 975 missiles through FY 2009. The Army’s LRIP of PAC-3 missiles began in the fourth
54 quarter of FY 1999, and the first unit was delivered in September 2001. The system IOT&E
was completed by September 2002, and IOC was declared in June 2004. IOC was achieved
when the first Patriiot operational battalion was fully equipped with five FUs and 32 PAC-3
missiles per FU. By the end of FY 2003, 268 missiles had been produced, and after that the
Army procured another 707 missiles through FY 2009.
TABLE E-38 PAC-3 System Investment Costs Through FY 2009 ( FY 2010 dollars )
Total Investment Average Annual Investment
Program Time Frame ( billions ) ( millions )
PAC-3 RDT&E ( defense-1983-2003 3. 8 183
wide )
Army PAC-3 RDT&E 2004-2005 0. 2 122
Army PAC-3 procurement 1997-2009 9. 0 696
( quantity = 975 )
Army PAC-3 modifications 2000 ( est. )-2009 2. 8 282
Total DOD and Army 15. 74
investment
System Acquisition Costs
Table E-39 provides both the PAC-3 missile cumulative average AUPC costs estimated
at $ 3. 1 million based on the MDA FY 2012 FYDP budget for a total quantity of 225 missiles,
and the annual lot quantities from FY 2010 through FY 2012. In the Army FY 2012 RDT&E
PB, there is a total budget of $ 366 million from FY 2011 through FY 2016 for development of a
missile system enhancement ( MSE ) upgraded PAC-3 missile. The Army plans to procure 294
upgraded PAC-3 missiles from FY 2013 through FY 2016 at a total estimated cost of $ 2. 1 billion
and to buy another 1, 234 MSE missiles after FY 2014 for a total inventory quantity of 1, 528
missiles.
54Most of the PAC-3 historical information was based on the Army’s Patriot PAC-3 Dec-09 Selected Acquisition
Report ( SAR ) and Army FY-11 RDT&E and Procurement Budget submitted in February 2010.
E-56
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-39 PAC-3 Missile Average Unit Procurement Costs (FY 2010 million dollars)
Cumulative Annual Lot Average Unit
Average Unit Cost Total Quantity Fiscal Year Quantities Cost per Lot
PAC-3 missile 3.13 225 FY 2010 59 3.42
FY 2011 78 3.11
FY 2012 88 2.94
Table E-40 lists the PAC-3 Battalion AUPC estimates for each of the main equipment
hardware elements listed for each Army battery fire unit.55 The Patriot battery fire unit total
AUPC range estimate includes support equipment; the lower bound of approximately $237
million represents the total of the hardware element unit costs and the upper bound of $260.5
million includes a 10 percent contingency cost along with the costs provided to the committee by
the Army.56
TABLE E-40 PAC-3 Battery Fire Unit Equipment AUPC (FY 2010 million $)
FU Equipment Average Unit Cost Quantity per Battery
Radar system 103.0 1
Engagement control station 26.8 1
Antenna mast group 10.5 1
Battery command post 7.5 1
PAC-3 launching station 7.4 6
Enhanced launcher electronic system (ELES) 5.4 6
Electrical power plant 3.1 1
Others 0.6 6
FU support equipment 7.3 1
Total battery cost (less PAC-3 missiles) 236.8-260.5
System Life Cycle Costs
From FY 2010 forward, the Army PAC-3/MSE system LCC range estimates for
development, procurement, and 20-yr O&S costs of approximately $14 billion to $16 billion are
presented in Table E-41. The total estimate from FY 2010 forward includes the following:
The requested Army funding for FY 2012 FYDP RDT&E PB of $0.4 billion for
upgraded PAC-3 MSE development program, and the total Procurement budget
requested of approximately $5.4 billion for the remaining procurement of another 275
PAC-3 missiles through FY 2012 ($1.5 billion); PAC-3 modifications ($1.4 billion),
and 292 new PAC-3 MSE upgraded missiles and other hardware ($2.1 billion), the
latter two programs over this FY 2010 through FY 2016 7-yr time frame.
The sustainment funding for operating and maintaining the entire force of PAC-
3/MSE batteries over a 20-yr service life.
55“Patriot Battery/Battalion Life Cycle Cost provided to NAS,” U. S. Army Air and Missiles Defense Lower Tier
Project Office Program Executive Office.
56Ibid.
E-57
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-41 Army PAC-3/MSE System Total LCC Estimate (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 0.36 0.44
Procurementb 11.5 16.9
Force quantity buy 275 new PAC-3 + 1,528 MSE missiles (and PAC-3 modifications)
MILCON None required None required
20-yr O&Sc 14.7 16.2
Total 20-yr LCC estimate 26.7 33.5
aThe PAC-3/MSE development cost estimate of $0.4 billion is based on the FY 2012 Army RDT&E budget
requested for the upgraded PAC-3 MSE system, approximately $366 million from FY 2011 through FY 2016.
bThe PAC-3/MSE total procurement cost range estimate of between $11.5 billion and $16.9 billion comprises
funding for three programs. The estimate is based on the FY 2012 Army missile procurement total requested from
FY 2010 through FY 2016 of approximately $5.3 billion for another 275 PAC-2 missiles, 294 new MSE missiles,
and annual PAC-3 procurement modification funds over this 7-yr time frame. The procurement cost also includes
the projected cost of completing the Army’s planned procurement of another 1,234 MSE missiles at an estimated
total cost of between $5.6 and $8.9 billion. The lower bound, or minimum cost estimate, is based on the Army’s
cited budget to complete the production run (in FY 2010 dollars), with an assumed learning, or cost improvement,
curve savings based on an average annual lot buy of 80 missiles. The upper bound, or maximum cost, estimate is
based on applying the same allocated average procurement unit cost per missile for the first 294 MSE missiles
projected forward over the remaining buy of 1,234 missiles at the same lot buy rate of 80 missiles per year. Finally,
the procurement cost range estimate also includes funds for continuing the PAC-3 procurement modification kits
beyond FY 2016 time frame. The lower bound, or minimum cost, was based on the Army’s cited procurement
budget to completion of over $0.8 billion. As an upper bound, the committee estimated the total PAC-3
procurement modification costs at approximately $3.0 billion, based on continuing to provide annual funds at the
same level as the requested Army FY 2012 FYDP funding through FY 2016 of approximately $200 million,
projected forward for another 15 years through the end of the MSE production of 1,234 missiles through FY 2030.
c Given a total force quantity of up to 1,500 PAC-3 missiles and another 1,528 MSE missiles, the total PAC-
3/MSE system 20-yr O&S cost of between $14.7 and $16.2 billion for operating and maintaining one fully
configured Army Patriot battalion consisting of four dedicated PAC-3/MSE batteries and a complement of
launchers, radars, fire control units, and other hardware is based on an estimated average annual O&S cost for one
Patriot battery at between $183.8 million and $202.1 million and one Patriot battalion at between $735.1 million and
$808.6 million. These two sets of range estimates were provided to the committee by the Program Executive Office
of the Army Air and Missiles Defense Lower Tier Project Office. The sustainment cost also covers operations and
maintenance training, support services, spares and GFE of all the major system hardware elements and equipment.
AN/TPY-2 Radar Systems
Relevant System Investment Costs
Even though development costs for an earlier version of THAAD radars may have been
initiated before FY 2003, it was elected to track and aggregate MDA investments in development
costs for the AN/TPY-2 radar beginning in this fiscal year, FY 2011, with the BMDS radar block
effort of 2006 and use of the TPS-X radar as a test bed for designing a forward-deployable radar
with modified software algorithms for tracking and discrimination. In FY 2003, this radar block
development was concurrent with the THAAD block design of 2004 and development of an
interceptor against short- to medium-range ballistic missiles and asymmetric threats and
demonstrations of exo- and high endoatmospheric intercept capability against a limited target set.
A transportable version of the forward-deployable X-band radars (FBX-T) was designed
and deployed at VAFB and in Japan through FY 2006. During FY 2006, the FBX-T and
THAAD radars were both designated as AN/TPY-2 radars. Block 2006 consists of an AN/TPY-2
basic program to develop releases of the software that allow searching and tracking in a forward-
E-58
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
based role and to incorporate discrimination algorithms from Project Hercules.57 The funds also
covered development of other radar software and the use of modeling and simulation, hardware-
in-the-loop testing, and validation of algorithms with the TPS-X radar at the Pacific Missile
Range Facility.
Through the end of FY 2009, two more radar block development efforts were under way.
Block 2008 focused on delivering updated software with new releases that were common to
support AN/TPY-2 forward-based and THAAD radar missions and on the design of a
mechanical steering kit to provide the AN/TPY-2 with real-time slewing in both azimuth and
elevation. Block 2010 development focused on (1) upgrading the software based on
discrimination database enhancements and (2) continuing to support the two radar missions.
Table E-42 summarizes the total MDA investments of $2.3 billion in AN/TPY-2 radar
block developments and procurements as well as radar test and evaluations with SBX radars
from FY 2003 through FY 2009.
TABLE E-42 AN/TPY-2 Radar System Investment Costs Through FY 2009 (FY 2010 dollars)
Total Investment Average Annual Investment
Program Time Frame (billions) (millions)
AN/TPY radar block 2003-2009 0.8 118
developmenta
AN/TPY-2 procurementb 2003-2009 1.4 353
SBX and AN/TPY-2 radar test 2008-2009 0.1 49
and evaluationc
Total investment 2.3
aEven though MDA estimated for the committee sunk costs of $630 million (in FY 2010 dollars) associated with
the AN/TPY-2 radar system development, these estimates only covered flight testing and BMDS ground testing.
(The information is from MDA “TPY-2 Cost Estimate Supporting MDA Cost Presentations to National Academy of
Sciences (NAS),” presentation to the committee, February 24, 2010.) As a result, the committee elected to base
historical development costs during this time frame on a higher estimate of $828 million (in FY 2010 dollars) based
on funds extracted from MDA FY 2004 through FY 2010 RDT&E budget justification sheets for the BMDS sensor
program. These efforts focused on radar block developments described above and modeling and simulation, as well
as ground and flight tests and evaluations.
bFrom FY 2003 through the end of FY 2009, six currently designated AN/TPY-2 radar systems have been
produced and fielded, with a seventh system in production and expected to have been delivered in FY 2010. The
procurement cost estimate listed above was provided as a sunk cost by MDA and represents the production cost
estimate for AN/TPY-2 systems prior to FY 2010. (The MDA production cost estimate is relatively consistent with
the magnitude of funds reported in the MDA FY 2003 through FY 2010 RDT&E budget justification sheets for the
BMDS sensor program for this radar system’s production, site activation and deployment, and system refurbishment
costs.)
c Beginning in FY 2008 as part of the BMDS sensor program budget an effort was initiated for the joint testing
and evaluation activities for both the AN/TPY-2 and the sea-based X-band radar (SBX) systems. This effort
continues through FY 2015 using funds allocated and listed above.
System Acquisition Costs
MDA also provided the committee in February 2010 with an AUPC estimate for the
AN/TPY-2 radar system of $210.8 million.58 However, since the MDA FY 2012 FYDP PB was
57Project Hercules funding was covered as part of MDA’s Advanced Technology program and continued through
FY 2010. It focused on developing algorithms and software in the context of persistent sensor coverage, pervasive
weapons coverage, global battle management, effective targeting, and improved effectiveness in advanced
environments.
58Missile Defense Agency Fiscal Year (FY) 2012 Budget Estimates, Procurement Defense-Wide, BMDS
AN/TPY-2 Radars Procurement, Exhibit P-40, Budget Item Justification, February 2011.
E-59
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
released, the committee elected to use the lower AUPC estimate for the procurement of 11
AN/TPY-2 radar systems costing $179 million based on the annual budget for one in FY 2010
and two per year from FY 2012 through FY 2016.
System O&S Costs
For TM-configured radars, the MDA annual average O&S cost per system varies from a
minimum of $14.9 million per system for two systems to be fielded in FY 2011 to a maximum of
$20.7 million per system projected for three operational systems in the FY 2012 to FY 2013 time
frame. However, MDA stated that these sustainment cost estimates do not include THAAD site-
specific support costs or the annual Army military personnel, security, and base operations costs,
which are included as part of the THAAD system sustainment costs.
Therefore in order to get a more complete set of support cost estimates for the TM-
configured AN/TPY-2 radar, the committee included and computed radar-specific average
annual O&S cost estimates per system based on the FY 2010 through FY 2015 annual costs
provided by the MDA THAAD project office for the following sustainment activities funded
specifically for AN/TPY-2 radar:59
Sustaining and logistics support,60
Repair of GFE and support equipment and procurement of replacement modifications
for fielded radar systems, and
Army-funded procurement of addition GFE, replenishment spares and repair parts,
and depot maintenance.
The average annual O&S cost for these cost elements over these 6 years is $22.7 million.
The average annual cost per THAAD TM radar varies from a minimum additional cost of $5.0
million per year for five radars fielded in FY 2014 to a maximum additional cost of $11.0 million
per year for two radars fielded in FY 2011 (all in FY 2010 dollars).
Finally, the committee included an allocated annual O&S cost for the Army-funded
indirect support and military personnel costs portion of the THAAD interceptor system cost for
sustaining the fielded TM-configured radar. The average annual O&S cost for these elements
over these 6 years is $5.5 million. The average annual cost per THAAD TM radar varies from a
minimum additional cost of $1.4 million per year for five radars fielded in FY 2014 to a
maximum additional cost of $2.7 million per year for two radars fielded in FY 2011 (all in FY
2010 dollars).
In summary, the total annual O&S cost per TM-configured AN/TPY-2 radar varies from
a minimum cost of $21.3 million per system to a maximum of $34.4 million per system (in FY
2010 dollars).
System Life Cycle Costs
From FY 2010 forward, the AN/TPY-2 radar system LCC range estimates for continuing
X-band radar incremental development, the planned procurement of 11 systems through FY
59MDA. 2010. “DOE Cost Estimates Supporting NAS: THAAD Cost Team,” February 26.
60In the THAAD FY-10 Sustainment Plans, Raytheon provided 100 percent of the contractor logistics support
(CLS) maintenance of fielded AN/TYP-2 radars. Raytheon under the CLS contract is responsible for engineering
support and radar software maintenance services.
E-60
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
2016, and 20-yr O&S costs of sustaining these forward-based radars is approximately $18 billion
to $24 billion Table E-43). The total estimate from FY 2010 forward includes the following:
The requested funding for FY 2012 FYDP PB from FY 2010 through FY 2016 for the
BMD radar development program at approximately $4.0 billion and the AN/TPY-2
procurement program at $2.0 billion for 11 additional AN/TPY-2 radar systems
through FY 2016.
The sustainment funding for operating and maintaining these 11 forward-based X-
band radars over a 20-yr service life.
TABLE E-43 AN/TPY-2 Radar System Total LCC Estimate (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 4.0 5.7
Procurementb 2.0 2.0
Force quantity buy 11 11
MILCON None required None required
20-yr O&Sc 12.1 16.6
Total 20-yr LCC estimate 18.1 24.3
aThe AN/TPY-2 development cost range estimate of $4.0 billion to $5.7 billion includes the FY 2012 MDA BMD
radar block development requested budget (excluding FY 2010 sustainment funds) from FY 2010 through FY-2016
of $2.4 billion for transitioning the Block 2010 AN/TPY-2 development into an X-band basic effort for continuing
the incremental releases of software algorithms (CX-1 and CX-2). These releases are for improving discrimination
and enhancing the common software that supports AN/TPY-2 radar operations worldwide. The effort also included
the development of critical engagement conditions and empirical measurement events where data are obtained from
ground and flight tests as input to system models and simulations.
Since procurement and delivery of the radar planned radar in FY 2012 FYDP time frame will not occur until after
FY 2016, the committee estimated an upper bound, or maximum, cost estimate to account for continuing X-band
development activities at least through the end of FY 2020 time frame. The additional cost of $1.7 billion is based
on the projecting the same average annual funding, approximately $340 million, forward for another 5 years.
bThe AN/TPY-2 radar system procurement cost estimate is based on the budget MDA requested in the FY 2012
FYDP PB of $2.0 billion, for 11 additional systems from FY 2010 through FY 2016 time frame.
cThe total O&S cost for sustaining 11 AN/TPY-2 radar systems over a 20-yr service life is based on all the radars
operating in a stand-alone, forward-based, mode. The lower bound, or minimum, O&S cost estimated is based on
the annual cost for three FBM-configured systems fielded in FY 2011 at $54.8 million per system, and the
maximum estimate is based on $75.4 million per system for two FBM-configured operational systems fielded in FY
2010. (As part of the Phase Adaptive Approach for the European missile defense system, MDA has proposed that
each interceptor site location include a forward-based (FBM) AN/TPY-2 X-band radar system. The current estimate
cited by MDA and used in a recent CBO report cited a projected annual sustainment cost of $70 million to operate
this configured radar system in FY 2013. This projected annual O&S cost in constant FY 2010 dollars is
comparable with the committee’s MDA-based maximum estimate of $75.4 million per system. However it should
be noted that CBO increased the previously estimated MDA operations costs by 50 percent to account for the
possible growth of these costs.
GBX (Stacked AN/TPY-2 Array) Radar System
The recommended Ground-Based Midcourse Defense-Evolved (GMD-E) deployment
described in Chapter 5 takes advantage of the space-based SBIRS and DSP satellite systems, as
well as currently planned forward-based AN/TPY-2 radars, referred to as standalone X-band
radar (FBX), located in Japan and at one or more locations north of Iran.
As also described in Chapter 5, the recommended GMD-E provides a significant
enhancement in land-based radars through the introduction of a recommended doubling of
existing AN/TPY-2 radars, one stacked on top of the other. For the purposes of this report, the
recommended doubled AN/TPY-2 radars are designated as GBX radars, and they would be
E-61
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
deployed at fixed sites co-located with the UEWR (ballistic missile early warning system
(BMEWS)) radars (Cape Cod, Massachusetts; Grand Forks, North Dakota; Thule, Greenland;
and Fylingales, United Kingdom). Additionally, as a result of its analysis, the committee
recommended in Chapter 5 that a fifth GBX radar be added at Clear, Alaska, and that the sea-
based X-band (SBX) radar be moved permanently to Adak, Alaska.
Each GBX radar consists essentially of two non-mobile AN/TPY-2 radar systems with
the two arrays mounted one above the other in a rigid assembly, coherently integrating the beam
forming transmit and receive functions in the electronics and software. These double (or
stacked) radars would be mounted on azimuth turntables (like the SBX radar) that could be
mechanically reoriented (not scanned) through an azimuth sector of ~ 270 degrees.
Since the GBX utilizes existing proven designs and hardware with a now well defined
cost basis, it takes advantage of the learning curve, especially on the transmit/receive (T/R)
modules that represent a significant cost of each radar.
A summary of the 20-year life cycle costs (LCC) for the five GBX radars is provided in
Table E-44 for acquiring and sustaining the system at the five sites noted above and in Chapter 5.
TABLE E-44 GBX Radar System Total LCC Estimate (FY 2010 billion dollars)
Minimum Maximum
Development 0.8 1.0
Procurement 1.6 1.6
Force quantity buy 5 5
MILCON 0.1 0.2
20-yr O&S 5.5 7.5
Total 20-yr LCC estimate 8.0 10.3
Note: These estimates do not include flight test costs as they are covered as separate line items for ongoing system
validation in MDA’s budget.
The costing used for the GBX radar is based on AN/TPY-2 and SBX radar cost data. The
development cost estimate covers the development and validation of electronics and software
modifications and the fixed mount and turntable based on SBX radar estimates. The unit cost for
the turntable and installation are derived from estimated cost of the SBX radar turntable. The
GBX radar is configured to provide double the power of the AN/TPY-2 radar and includes an
FBX network communication package. All tractor/trailers used in the mobile systems are
eliminated in favor of fixed pad mounting.
The GBX radar development cost range estimate is based scaling down the new radar
design effort needed by leveraging off of the proven heritage radar designs of the AN/TPY-2
phased array and receiver electronics hardware (at a total sunk development cost through FY-09
of $2.3 billion), and an SBX analogous radar turntable. The resulting range estimate of between
$0.8 and $1.0 billion is based on the reduced level of system development effort needed for
designing GBX system-unique electronics and software to coherently integrate the two arrays,
packaging and integrating the two stacked AN/TPY-2 phased arrays onto a turntable, and
interfaces for adding an FBX network communications package of already designed electronics
and developed software. The estimate also includes producing two system test articles and
performing the end-to-end radar testing needed to meet the expected system’s higher power and
radar coverage and tracking performance requirements to support MDA’s Integrated Master Test
Plan.
The GBX radar procurement cost estimate is based on continuing production using the
same AN/TPY-2 radar manufacturing assembly “warm” line currently in place for producing the
E-62
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
Missile Defense Agency’s (MDA) funded eleven AN/TPY-2 radar systems needed, and avoiding
the non-recurring production costs of re-starting the AN/TPY-2 radar production line and
incurring any production start-up tooling, testing and line requalification costs. The average unit
cost estimate of MDA’s procurement of eleven AN/TPY-2 radars is $181 million with the
eleventh unit at $175 million. This build up of the unit recurring cost is based on first extending
the AN/TPY-2 production line and applying the same realized manufacturing assembly labor
learning cost improvement curve efficiencies for assembling an additional ten dismounted
antenna units, cooling equipment units, diesel generator power units, and five modified
electronic equipment units, including material cost unit price discounts in buying the quantity of
T/R modules and other common parts from the same vendors at the higher total production lot
quantities needed. The GBX radar average unit cost for a quantity of five systems is estimated to
be $320 million—approximately $139 million higher than the average unit cost estimate of
MDA’s procurement of eleven AN/TPY-2 radars. The GBX unit costs provide:
Two antenna units without trailers, two cooling equipment units and two prime power
supply units;
One electronics equipment unit modified to integrate the beam forming and receiving
functions of the two antenna units;
The turntable, its control and associated mounted interface hardware;
An FBX network communication package; and
Relatively more complex, additional system integration and end-to-end checkout cost
over the AN/TPY-2.
The GBX-specific military construction (MILCON) costs needed before deploying and
operating the five new GBX radars was estimated by scaling down the previous costs incurred
for constructing the infrastructure facility for the forward-based AN/TPY-2 radar operating in
Israel based on assuming each GBX radar will be able to use existing co-located ground radar
facilities at the current UEWR (BMEWS) sites noted above.
Finally, the GBX annual operations and support (O&S) estimates were based on
adjusting the expenditures MDA provided to the committee for sustaining AN/TPY-2 radars in
Israel to reflect use of the operating sites’ consolidation of government base security and early
warning radar operations and support personnel as well as available standby power from the
local electrical grid system already in place at the government sites.
SBX Radar System
Relevant System Investment Costs
The SBX radar as a midcourse defense sensor is capable of providing weapons task
plans, in-flight target updates, TOMs and kill assessments. The MDA investment in
development of the SBX radar began in FY 2002 with an X-band radar technology development
effort focused on providing high-resolution tracking and discrimination data to significantly
enhance the GMD fire control and, subsequently, the EKV. The RDT&E funds also covered the
development of software algorithms to enhance target discrimination, along with material
component enhancements to improve output power and sensitivity. Concurrent with this radar
development effort, the SBX program was also initiated, with long-lead parts procurement
beginning in FY 2002; procurement of the sea-based platform, main radar structure, radar
electronic components, and support equipment and construction of support structures and
E-63
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
facilities began the following year. The plan was for delivery of one SBX radar test article for
FY 2005. The RDT&E budget also included funds for an IFICS data terminal. The sea-based
platform where the SBX was mounted was envisioned to be a modified seagoing,
semisubmersible platform similar to the operational oil drilling platforms in use.
Table E-45 summarizes the total investment in the SBX system acquisition costs of $1.7
billion from FY 2002 through FY 2009.
TABLE E-45 SBX Radar System Investment Costs Through FY 2009 (FY 2010 dollars)
Total Investment Average Annual Investment
Program Time Frame (billions) (millions)
Sea-based X-band (SBX) radar 2002-2005 0.4 100
developmenta
SBX radar system 2002-2005 1.0 245
procurementb
SBX radar enhancementsb 2006-2009 0.3 75
Total investment 1.7
aOver a 4-yr period from FY 2002 through FY 2005, $1.4 billion of the $1.7 billion was associated with the SBX-
specific X-band advanced technology development effort and concurrent procurement of the SBX radar system test
article, modified the sea-based vessel platform, and IDT estimated at system unit cost $980.5 million. (As noted, the
annual development funds identified for the X-band advanced technology effort explicitly earmarked for the SBX
radar program were allocated as part of the BMD Midcourse Defense Segment program budget from FY 2002
through FY 2005. To the extent possible, the committee’s total development cost estimates generated from the
MDA RDT&E budget from FY 2002 through FY 2009 were relatively consistent with the total sunk and with FYDP
development cost estimates provided by MDA. SOURCE: MDA. 2010. “SBX Joint Cost Estimates Supporting
MDA Cost Presentations to NAS,” February 28.
bThe development cost estimated during this 4-yr period is based on funds explicitly identified for the sea-based
X-band radar development portion of the BMD Midcourse Defense Segment program’s annual MDA RDT&E
budgets from FY 2007 through FY 2008 budgets and the FY 2009 sea-based X-band radar program. The SBX radar
enhancement from FY 2006 through FY 2009 focused on the following: (1) developing algorithms for
discrimination of more complex threat sets and targets; (2) designing material and electronic component
enhancements to improve the radar’s output power; (3) updating and integrating the SBX software for improving the
radar’s sensitivity; and (4) performing system integration and ground and flight testing activities.
System O&S Costs
The annual costs for operations and sustainment of the SBX radar and the vessel as an
overall system are based on implementing a flexible support strategy with Pearl Harbor, San
Diego, and Dutch Harbor as forward-support ports. The sustainment costs include XBR
software maintenance, shipyard maintenance and certifications, and sustainment activities for the
radar, vessel, and support vessel. The MDA O&S costs provided to the committee do not
include the costs of MDA’s transition to the Navy planned for FY 2012 and beyond.61
MDA provided the committee with an annual O&S cost breakdown from FY 2012
through FY 2017 consisting of overall SBX vessel and radar system estimates for unit personnel,
unit operations, maintenance, sustaining support and continuing system improvements.62 Since
61MDA provided the committee with the SBX program schedule as of February 2010. The schedule identified
plans for transition of the Navy as the mission integrator and operator of the offshore SBX support vessel to the
Marine Corps as the operator for the SBX vessel. It also identified transferring responsibility from MDA to the
Navy as being responsible for funding the X-band radar CLS and system security activities.
62For its purposes, the committee accounted for MDA’s estimates for continuing system improvement of
approximately $0.5 million (in then-year dollars) as part of the ongoing development cost estimates for FY 2010
through FY 2015.
E-64
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
these estimates were not transparent with respect to the sustainment costs of the SBX vessel and
the offshore support vessel and the SBX radar system itself, the committee provided a summary
of the specific annual O&S costs in Table E-46. The FY 2010 and FY 2011 O&S costs listed are
based on funds earmarked for these two sustainment activities, as listed in the MDA RDT&E
FY-2011 PB and identified in the sea-based X-band radar sustainment program budget
justification details.
TABLE E-46 SBX Vessel and Radar System Annual O&S Costs (FY 2010 million dollars)
Fiscal Year Vessel O&S Costsa SBX Radar System O&S Costsb
2010 106 44
2011 107 46
2012c 108 47
2013 111 51
2014 109 51
2015 129 63
Average 112 50
aThe SBX vessel O&S costs include the costs of the SBX and crews for the offshore motor support vessel (the
Dove), spare parts provisioning, and the lease of the Dove for continuing to support ongoing SBX shipboard
operations, maintenance, and logistical support activities. These activities include galley and starboard crane
upgrades, liquid condition and cooling system modifications, and so on. The activities also include participating in
BMDS ground and flight tests. The O&S costs also include activities to support vessel maintenance certifications
and the planned procurement of any parts due to the obsolescence of current onboard processors, controls, or
displays. In addition, the costs also include onboard system force protection for the SBX and portside security for
the SBX and the Dove.
bThe SBX radar O&S costs include costs for sustainment activities for operating and maintaining the X-band radar
and associated equipment including the onboard IDT. The O&S costs have included the recent enhancements to the
onboard operations control center and installation of the Emergency Radome Pressurization System. The costs
include CLS to maintain the onboard primary mission equipment and support to the operation crews.
As part of the estimates for FY 2010 and FY 2011, the committee has included the annual cost of providing
sustaining engineering and logistics support (i. e., repairs and spares) for the fielded suite of onboard SBX
communications hardware and software for providing 24/7 SATCOM operations.
c Since the MDA RDT&E FY 2011 PB did not provide the funding projections for the vessel and SBX radar
system for FY 2012 through FY 2015, the committee used the total annual O&S costs provided by MDA for those
fiscal years and allocated the costs for each category based on the percentages computed for the FY 2011 funds cited
in the budget justification sheets for the SBX sustainment program budgets. (The MDA O&S cost estimates on
which the allocations were based were provided in MDA, 2010, “SBX Joint Cost Estimates Supporting MDA Cost
Presentations to NAS,” February 28. The committee assumed the funds allocated and reported in the budget for FY
2011 closely approximate the projected split of sustainment costs going forward from FY 2012 through FY2015.)
System Life Cycle Costs
From FY 2010 forward, the SBX radar system LCC range estimates for continuing X-
band radar development and 20-yr O&S costs of sustaining this ship-based radar system are
estimated at between $2.1 billion and $2.9 billion (Table E-47). The total estimate from FY
2010 forward includes the following:
Requested funding of approximately $1.1 billion for FY-2012 FYDP PB from FY
2010 through FY 2016 for the SBX development and support program, and
Sustainment funding for operating and maintaining the SBS radar system over a 20-yr
service life.
E-65
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-47 SBX Ship-Based Radar System Total LCC Estimate ( FY 2010 billion dollars )
Minimum Maximum
Developmenta 1. 1 1. 9
Procurementb Not applicable Not applicable
Force quantity buy 1 1
MILCON None required None required
Sc 20-yr O&1. 0 1. 0
Total 20-yr LCC estimate 2. 1 2. 9
aThe SBX system development lower bound, or minimum, cost estimate of $ 1. 1 million accounts for the efforts
from FY 2010 through FY 2016 for MDA funds focused on ( 1 ) developing and providing system engineering and
X-band radar advanced discrimination algorithms and software build releases for SBX system integration and
testing, and ( 2 ) demonstrating this SBX target tracking capability on planned flight interceptor tests by acquiring the
targets of opportunity and sending tracking reports to the GMD fire control.
The upper bound, or maximum, development cost estimate of $ 1. 9 billion adds $ 0. 8 billion for continuing this
SBX-specific radar development effort based on extending the average annual FY 2012 FYDP budget request of
$ 160 million for at least 5 more years through FY 2020.
b Procurement cost is not separately identified from the Development Cost.
cThe total O&S cost for sustaining the ship-based SBX radar systems over a 20-yr service life is estimated at $ 1. 0
billion based on applying an average sustainment cost estimate of $ 50 million over the 20-yr service life of this
system. The SBX radar O&S estimate includes costs for operating and maintaining the X-band radar and associated
equipment for the onboard IDT.
INTERCEPTOR UNIT PRODUCTION COST DETAILS
Aegis SM-2
Even though the first 71 SM-3 Block 1A interceptors were produced using RDT&E
funds, the average missile unit costs are based on reported annual procurement budgets and lot
quantity buys beginning in FY 2009. By the end of FY 2010, 41 SM-3 Block IAs were expected
to be in inventory. The cumulative average unit cost of the last two lots of the SM-3 Block IA
missiles is estimated at $ 9. 6 million in FY 2010 dollars.
“SM-3 Block IA provides [ greater ] capability over [ Block I ] to engage short-to
intermediate-range ballistic missiles. [ The design ] incorporates rocket motor upgrades and
computer program modifications to improve sensor performance, and missile guidance and
control.... It... includes producibility and maintainability features required to qualify the
”63 missile as a tactical fleet asset.
Even though the first 34 SM-3 Block IB interceptors were produced using RDT&E funds,
the average missile unit costs are based on reported annual procurement budgets and lot quantity
buys beginning in FY 2011 and going forward through FY 2015. The projected cumulative
average unit cost for the total quantity buy of 290 missiles over the 5-yr production is estimated
at $ 9. 3 million.
SM-3 Block IB incorporates a two-color, all reflective IR seeker, enabling longer range
acquisition and increased threat discrimination. The missile is configured with a throttleable
DACS ( TDACS ) to provide a more flexible and lower cost alternative to the solid DACS.
Table E-48, a repeat of E-32, provides the detailed estimates by fiscal year for these two
blocks of Aegis missile interceptors.
63See Raytheon news release: “Raytheon Missiles Engage Ballistic Missile and Airborne Targets Over the Pacific
Ocean, ” April 26, 2007.
E-66
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
TABLE E-48 SM-3 Average Unit Procurement Cost Summary (FY 2010 million $)
Cumulative Annual Lot Average Unit
Average Unit Cost Total Quantity Fiscal Year Quantities Cost per Lot
SM-3 Block IA 9.6 41 FY 2009 23 9.3
(last two lots) FY2010 18 10.0
SM-3 Block IB 9.3 290 FY 2011 8 11.6
FY 2012 66 10.3
FY 2013 72 9.4
FY 2014 72 8.8
FY 2015 72 8.5
Figure E-8 plots cumulative average unit procurement cost as a function of production
quantity for the SM-3 Block IA missiles along with the computed best-fit learning, or CIC slope
for this missile block build extended forward for a total buy quantity of 134. The CIC slope is
computed at 94.5 percent, with a first unit or T cost of $13.7 million in FY 2010 dollars.
1
FIGURE E-8 Aegis SM-3 Block IA missile. Cumulative average unit cost learning curve.
Terminal High-Altitude Area Defense
Each THAAD battery consists of a basic load of 48 interceptors, 6 launchers, TFCC
housed in 2 TSGs, and peculiar and common support equipment.
Even though the first 50 THAAD interceptors were produced using RDT&E funds, the
average missile unit costs are based on reported annual procurement budgets and lot quantity
buys beginning in FY 2010 and continuing at the rate of 72 per year from FY 2013 through FY
E-67
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Making Sense of Ballistic Missile Defense: An Assessment of Concepts and Systems for U. S. Boost-Phase Missile Defense in Comparison to Other Alternatives
PREPUBLICATION COPY—SUBJECT TO FURTHER EDITORIAL CORRECTION.
2015. The FY 2011 budget plans were based on having 26 THAAD (operational) interceptors in
inventory by the end of FY 2010.
Table E-49 below provides the detailed estimates by fiscal year the THAAD missile
interceptors.
TABLE E-49 THAAD Missile Average Unit Procurement Cost Summary (FY 2010 million dollars)
Cumulative Annual Lot Average Unit
Average Unit Cost Total Quantity Fiscal Year Quantities Cost per Lot
THAAD 9.2 161 FY2010 26 10.5
interceptor FY2011 63 9.3
FY2012 72 8.6
Figure E-9 plots cumulative average unit procurement cost as a function of production
quantity for the THAAD missile, along with the best-fit” CIC slope for the missiles block build
extended forward for a total buy quantity of 134. The CIC slope is computed at 94.5 percent
with a first unit, or T, cost of $13.7 million in FY 2010 dollars.
1
$15
$14.3 Actual FYDP-based annual Procurement QTY&Costs Thru FY-12
T1 Unit Cost
$14 Best Fit Learning Curve at 93.0% Rate with T1 = $14.3M
)
$
M
0
$13
1
-Y
F
(
ts $12
o
C
t
in
U$11
e
g $10.7 $10.5
a
r
e
v
A
e
$10 $10.0
v
ita
$9.3
lu
m $9 $9.3 $8.6
Es
a
ti
t
m
C
a
u
t
m
ed
Q
C
T
o
Y
s t
=
o
3
f
7
$
7
7.7
u
C for FY-15
$8.6 Lot QTY of 72
$8
$8.0
$7
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Cumulative Quantity
FIGURE E-9 THAAD missile. Cumulative average unit cost learning curve.
E-68
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.