IN THE
BRITISH MUSEUM.
WITH 53 PLATES AND 180 ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT.
PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE TRUSTEES.
1909.
PRICE HALF-A-CROWN.
[All Rights Reserved.]
HARRISON AND SONS, LTD.,
PRINTERS IN ORDINARY TO HIS MAJESTY,
ST. MARTIN’S LANE, LONDON, W. C. 2.
PRINTED IN ENGLAND.

PREFACE.
The Collection of Egyptian Antiquities in the British Museum
comprises nearly fifty thousand objects, and many of its sections are
unrivalled in completeness. It illustrates, in a more or less
comprehensive manner, the history and civilization of the Egyptians
from the time when their country was passing out of the Predynastic
Period under a settled form of government, about.. 4500, to the
B C
time of the downfall of the power of the Queens Candace at Meroë,
in the Egyptian Sûdân, in the second or third century after Christ.
The monuments of Christian Egypt also form a very important series,
and illustrate Coptic funerary sculpture and art between the sixth
and eleventh centuries..
A D
The present Guide has been prepared with the view of providing
the visitor to the British Museum with information of a more general
character than can be conveniently given in the Guides to the
several Galleries and Rooms of the Department. An attempt has here
been made to present a sketch of the origin, the manners and
customs, the language, the writing, the literature, the religion, and
the burial rites of the peoples of Egypt, and of their history under
the successive dynasties; embodying references to the several
objects of the Collection which illustrate the different branches of the
subject. The text is supplemented by an abundant selection of cuts
and plates of the most important of the antiquities.
E. A. WALLIS BUDGE.
D E A A, B M,
EPARTMENT OF GYPTIAN AND SSYRIAN NTIQUITIES RITISH USEUM
September 29, 1908.

CONTENTS.
PAGE
v
PREFACE
ix
LIST OF PLATES
xi
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT.— 1
CHAPTER I THE COUNTRY OF EGYPT
”.—...
II ETHNOGRAPHY LANGUAGE FORMS OF WRITING,
DECIPHERMENT OF EGYPTIAN HIEROGLYPHICS,. 20
ALPHABET AND WRITING NATIONAL CHARACTER
”.—, 58
III EGYPTIAN LITERATURE SACRED AND PROFANE
”.—....
IV MANNERS AND CUSTOMS MARRIAGE EDUCATION DRESS....
FOOD AMUSEMENTS CATTLE BREEDING TRADE
76
HANDICRAFTS
”.—.. 103
V ARCHITECTURE PAINTING SCULPTURE
”.—. 116
VI THE KING AND HIS SUBJECTS MILITARY SERVICE
”.— 122
VII EGYPTIAN RELIGION
”.—. 158
VIII EMBALMING THE EGYPTIAN TOMB
”.—.. 180
IX NUMBERS DIVISIONS OF TIME CHRONOLOGY
”.—. 188
X HISTORY OF EGYPT ANCIENT EMPIRE
”.—. 213
XI HISTORY OF EGYPT MIDDLE EMPIRE
”.—. 228
XII HISTORY OF EGYPT NEW EMPIRE
”.—. 268
XIII HISTORY OF EGYPT PTOLEMAÏC PERIOD. 275
HISTORY OF EGYPT ROMAN PERIOD. 282
HISTORY OF EGYPT ARAB PERIOD
286
A LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL KINGS OF EGYPT
290
CARTOUCHES OF THE PRINCIPAL KINGS OF EGYPT
303
INDEX

LIST OF PLATES.
SEE PAGE
P I. Vignette from the papyrus of Queen
LATE
Netchemet 61
” II. Text and vignettes from the sarcophagus of
King Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt 66
” III. False door from the tomb of Sheshȧ 68
” IV. Sepulchral tablet of Thethȧ 68
” V. Sepulchral tablet of Sebek-ḥetep 68
” VI. Sepulchral tablet of Pai-neḥsi 68
” VII. Sepulchral tablet of Bak-en-Ȧmen 68
” VIII. Sepulchral tablet of Nes-Ḥeru 68
” IX. Painted relief from the tomb of Ur-ȧri-en-
Ptaḥ 81
” X. Painted sepulchral tablet of Kaḥu 81
” XI. Columns in the temple of Seti I 107
” XII. Head of a priestess 115
” XIII. Seated figures of Khā-em-Uast and his wife 115
” XIV. False door from the tomb of Ȧsȧ-ānkh 167
” XV. View of a painted chamber in the tomb of
Nekht 175
” XVI. Wall painting from a tomb 175
” XVII. General view of the sarcophagus of Nekht-
Ḥeru-ḥebt 177
” XVIII. General view of the sarcophagus of Nes-
Qeṭiu 177
” XIX. Sepulchral tablet of Ban-āa 177
” XX. The Great Pyramid and Sphinx 196
” XXI. The “Shêkh al-Balad” 203
” XXII. Tablet of Ȧntef 210
” XXIII. Tablet of Sebek-āa 211

” XXIV. Tablet and figure of Sa-Hathor 215
” XXV. Statue of Usertsen III 217
” XXVI. Head of Ȧmen-em-ḥāt III 218
” XXVII. Statue of Sekhem-uatch-taui-Rā 223
” XXVIII. Stele of the reign of Sekhem-ka-Rā 223
” XXIX. Memorial cone of Sebek-ḥetep 223
” XXX. The Hall of Columns at Karnak 231
” XXXI. Head of a colossal statue of Thothmes III 231
” XXXII. Statue of Ȧmen-ḥetep III 234
” XXXIII. The Colossi of Ȧmen-ḥetep III 234
” XXXIV. Letter of Ȧmen-ḥetep III 236
” XXXV. Letter of Tushratta, king of Mitani, to Ȧmen-
ḥetep III 236
” XXXVI. Lion of Tut-ānkh-Ȧmen 238
” XXXVII. Statues of a priest and his wife 239
” XXXVIII. The temple of Abû Simbel 242
” XXXIX. Head of a colossal statue of Rameses II 245
” XL. Sepulchral stele of Qaḥa 248
” XLI. Vignettes from the papyrus of Queen
Netchemet 252
” XLII. Hathor-headed capital 254
” XLIII. Relief of Queen Ānkhnes-neferȧb-Rā 261
” XLIV. The goddess Nut 261
” XLV. Statue of Uaḥ-ȧb-Rā 261
” XLVI. Obelisk dedicated to Thoth, Twice-great 265
” XLVII. Vignettes and text from the sarcophagus of
Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt 265
” XLVIII. Relief of Ptolemy II 269
” XLIX. The temple of Edfû 270
” L. Granite shrine from Philae 271
” LI. Tablet of Tiberius 277
” LII. Tablet of Tiberius 277
” LIII. Tablet of Apa Paḥomo 283

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE
TEXT.
PAGE
Map of Egypt 2, 3
The Delta of Egypt 5
The Entrance to the Valley of the Tombs of the Kings at
Thebes 6
The Nile-gods and their cavern 8
The Nile-god in his cavern 8
The Nile-god bearing offerings 9
The Nile-gods of the South and North 9
The Nile from sea to source 11
Statue of Ḥāpi the Nile-god 12
Egyptian hunters of the Archaïc Period, Nos. 1-6 23
Ivory figure of a king 24
Bone figure of a dwarf 24
Bone figure of a woman carrying a child 25
Bone figure of a woman with inlaid eyes 25
Figure of Betchmes 26
Figure of Nefer-hi 26
Fox playing the double pipes 27
Mouse seated on a chair 28
Cat herding geese 29
Lion and unicorn playing draughts 30
The spearing of Āpep 31
A page of writing from the Great Harris Papyrus 36
Demotic writing 38
Coptic inscription 41
The Rosetta Stone 42, 43
Two wooden writing palettes 54

Slab of limestone inscribed in hieratic 56
Vignette and text from the papyrus of Ani 60
Vignette and text from the papyrus of Nu 60
Vignette and text from the papyrus of Ḥeru-em-ḥeb 61
Text from the Book “May my name flourish” 63
The ceremony of “Opening the mouth” 64
Marble sun-dial 72
Head of a priestess 80
Relief, with a hippopotamus 84
Green schist bear 86
Egyptian house 88
Egyptian hut 90
Ivory head-rest 91
The Bull Apis 93
The Bull Mnevis 94
Flint cow’s head 95
Jewellers drilling and polishing beads 99
Pylon and court of the temple of Edfû 104
Gateway to the temple of Rameses III 105
Gateway of Ptolemy IX at Karnak 106
Granite obelisks at Karnak 107
Pillars at Philae 108
Statue of Ȧn-kheft-ka 109
Figure of a priest 110
Head of a statue of Neb-ḥap-Rā 110
Statue of Sebek-nekht 111
Figure of a king 112
Queen Tetȧ-Kharṭ 113
Head of Ȧmen-ḥetep III 114
Statue of Isis 115
Figure of Qen-nefer 118
Statues of Māḥu and Sebta 119
The principal gods and goddesses of Egypt (57 figures) 123-126
Khnemu fashioning a man on a potter’s wheel 135
Osiris rising from the sarcophagus 138
Osiris in his shrine 140

Thoth weighing the heart 140
Maāt weighing the heart 140
Osiris on his Judgment Throne 141
Rā at sunrise 143
Rā at sunset 143
Flint amulets (4 figures) 148
The step pyramid at Ṣaḳḳârah 166
A group of maṣṭaba tombs 167
Tablet for offerings 168
An Egyptian tomb 168
The soul visiting the body 168
Section of the Second Pyramid 171
Entrance to the tomb of Khnemu-ḥetep 172
Entrance to a royal tomb 173
Plan and section of the tomb of Seti I (2 cuts) 174
Wall painting from a tomb 175
Coffin of Ḥes-Peṭān-Ȧst 176
Figures of Ka-ṭep and Ḥetep-ḥeres 177
King Semti dancing before a god 190
Relief from the tomb of Sherȧ 192
Relief from the tomb of Suten-ȧbu 194
King Khufu 196
Section of the Great Pyramid 197
King Khāf-Rā 199
King Menkau-Rā 200
Section of the Third Pyramid 202
King Usr-en-Rā Ȧn 204
Shrine of Pa-suten-sa 219
Stele of Tatiankef 220
Lion of Khian 225
Statue of Ȧmen-ḥetep I 229
The Temple of Luxor 233
Scarabs of Ȧmen-ḥetep III (2 cuts) 235
Kneeling statue of Rameses II 241
Façade of the Ramesseum 243
Statues of Rameses II (2 cuts) 244

Statue of Khā-em-Uast 246
Statue of Seti II 247
Statue of Ānkh-renp-nefer 254
Head of Psammetichus II 259
Stele of Ptolemy II 269
Head of a statue of a Ptolemy 271
Limestone window 273
“Pharaoh’s Bed” 276
Coptic sepulchral tablet 279
Tablet of Plêïnôs 281
Tablet of David 281
Tablet of Abraam 284
Tablet of Rachel 284

INTRODUCTION
TO THE
EGYPTIAN COLLECTIONS IN THE
BRITISH
MUSEUM.

CHAPTER I.
T C E L. T D. O. L. T N.
HE OUNTRY OF GYPT AND ITS IMITS HE ELTA ASES AKES HE ILE
I. N F. F. A M D
NUNDATION ILE ESTIVALS AMINES NCIENT AND ODERN IVISIONS OF
E S.
GYPT AND THE ÛDÂN
The Land of Egypt is situated in the north-east shoulder of the
continent of Africa, and in the earliest times it consisted of that
portion of the Nile Valley which lay between the Mediterranean Sea
and the northern end of the First Cataract; the Island of Ābu, or
Elephantine, and the town of Sunnu, or Sunt, the Syene of classical
writers and the Sewênêh of the Bible (Ezekiel xxix, 10), forming the
southern boundary of the country. The northern limit of Egypt has,
in historic times, always been the Mediterranean Sea, but its
southern limit varied considerably at different periods. Under the Vth
dynasty, about.. 3600, it was marked by Elephantine and Syene.
B C
Under the XIIth dynasty, about.. 2500, it was extended to
B C
Semnah and Kummah, about 250 miles to the south of Syene. Under
the XVIIIth dynasty, about.. 1600, the southern frontier town was
B C
probably Napata, the modern Merawi, about 600 miles, by river,
from Syene. A century later the Egyptians took possession of the
Island of Meroë, and they appear to have built a town at a place
about 930 miles from Syene, by river, to mark their southern frontier.
Between.. 1200 and 600 the frontier was withdrawn to Syene,
B C
where it remained practically for several centuries. Under the Arabs,
the southern frontier was fixed at Dongola (.. 1275), the old
A D
Nubian capital, which lay about 570 miles from Syene. In 1873, Sir
Samuel Baker extended it to Gondókoro, about 2,823 miles, by river,
from Cairo. In 1895, the frontier town of Egypt in the south was
Wâdî Ḥalfah, and it continued to be so until the capture of Umm
Darmân (Omdurmân) in 1898. At the present time, the southern
limit of Egypt is marked by the 22nd parallel of N. latitude, which

crosses the Nile at Gebel Sahaba, about eight miles north of the
Camp at Wâdî Ḥalfah, and its northern limit is the northernmost
point of the Delta. The distance, by river, from the Camp to the
Mediterranean Sea, is about 960 miles. The boundary of Egypt on
the east is marked by a line drawn from Ar-Rafah, which lies a little
to the east of Al-Arîsh, the Rhinocolura of classical writers, to Tabah,
at the head of the Gulf of Akabah, by the eastern coast of the
[1]
Peninsula of Sinai, and by the Red Sea. On the west, the
boundary is marked by a line drawn from the Gulf of Solum due
south to a point a little to the south-west of the Oasis of Sîwah, and
then proceeding in a south-easterly direction to the 22nd parallel of
N. latitude, near Wâdî Ḥalfah.
MAP OF EGYPT.
The name “Egypt,” which has come to us through the Latin
“Aegyptus” and the Greek “Aiguptos,” is derived from one of the
ancient Egyptian names of Memphis, viz., “Ḥet-ka-Ptaḥ,” meaning
“Temple of the Ka, or Double, of Ptaḥ”
𓉗𓏏(cid:0)𓉐𓂓(cid:0)𓏤𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓀭
or
𓉘(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓏤𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓀭(cid:0)𓉜.
The common name for Egypt among the
Egyptians was “Qem,” or “Qemt,” i. e., the “Black Land,”
𓆎𓏏(cid:0)𓊖,
in
allusion to the brownish-black mud of which the soil chiefly consists.
Another name of frequent occurrence in the literature is “Ta-Merȧ,”
the “Land of the Inundation,”
𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓌻𓇋𓆳𓊖.
The soil of Egypt is formed of a layer of sedimentary deposits,
which has been laid down by the Nile, and varies in depth from
about 40 to 110 feet; the rate at which this layer is being added to
at the present time in the bed of the river is said to be about four
inches in a century. In prehistoric times the sea ran up as far as
Esna, and deposited thick layers of sand and gravel; upon these the
rivers and streams flowing from the south spread the mud and stony
matter which they brought down with them, and thus the soil of
Egypt was gradually built up. Near Esna begins the layer of
sandstone, which extends southward, and covers nearly the whole of
Nubia, and rests ultimately on crystalline rock.

The Delta of Egypt.
The part of Egypt which lies to the north of the point where the
Nile divides itself into two branches resembles in shape a lotus
flower, or a triangle standing on its apex, and because of its
similarity to the fourth letter of their alphabet, the Greeks called it
Delta, Δ.
The Delta is formed of a deep layer of mud and sand, which rests
upon the yellow quartz sands, and gravels and stiff clay, which were
laid down by the sea in prehistoric times. The area of the Delta is
about 14,500 square miles.
The Oases of Egypt are seven in number, and all are situated in
the Western Desert. Their names are: 1. Oasis of Sîwah or Jupiter
Ammon; 2. Oasis of Baḥarîyah, i. e., the Northern Oasis; 3. The
Oasis of Farâfrah, the Ta-ȧḥet of the Egyptians; 4. The Oasis of
Dâkhlah, i. e., the “Inner” Oasis, the Tchesti of the Egyptians; 5.
The Oasis of Khârgah, i. e., the “Outer Oasis,” the Uaḥt-rest or
“Southern Oasis” of the Egyptians; 6. The Oasis of Dailah, to the
west of Farâfrah; 7. The Oasis of Kûrkûr, to the west of Aswân.
The principal Lakes of Egypt are: 1. Birkat al-Ḳurûn, a long,
narrow lake lying to the north-west of the Province of the Fayyûm,
and formerly believed to be a part of the Lake Moeris described by
Herodotus; 2. The Natron Lakes, which lie in the Natron Valley, to
the north-west of Cairo; from these the Egyptians obtained salt and
various forms of soda, which were used for making incense, and in
embalming the dead; 3. Lake Menzâlah, Lake Bûrlûs, Lake Edkû,
Lake Abukîr, now almost reclaimed, and Lake Mareotis; all these
are in the Delta. Lake Timsaḥ (i. e., Crocodile Lake) and the Bitter
Lakes, which were originally mere swamps, came into existence with
the making of the Suez Canal.
The Fayyûm which was in ancient times regarded as one of the
Oases, is nothing more than a deep depression scooped out of the
limestone, on which are layers of loams and marls covered over by
Nile mud. The district was called by the Egyptians “Ta-she,” or “Land

of the Lake”; at the present time it has an area of about 850 square
miles, and is watered by a branch of the Nile called the “Baḥr Yûsuf,”
which flows into it through an opening in the mountains on the west
bank of the Nile. The Baḥr Yûsuf, or “River of Joseph,” is not called
after the name of the patriarch Joseph, but that of some
Muḥammadan ruler. It is not a canal as was once supposed, but an
arm of the Nile, which, however, needs clearing out periodically. In
the Fayyûm lay the large body of water to which Herodotus gave the
name of Lake Moeris. He believed that this Lake had been
constructed artificially, but modern irrigation authorities in Egypt
have come to the conclusion that the mass of water which he saw
and thought was a lake was merely the result of the Nile flood, or
inundation, and that there never was a Lake Moeris.
The Entrance to the Valley of the Tombs of the Kings at Thebes.
Deserts. On each side of the Valley of the Nile lies a vast desert.
That on the east is called the Arabian Desert, or Red Sea Desert,
and that on the west the Libyan Desert. The influence of the latter
on the climate of Egypt is very great, as for six months of the year
the prevailing wind blows from the west. At many places in the
Eastern and Western Deserts there are long stretches of sand scores
of miles in length, and immense tracts covered with layers of loose
pebbles and stone, and the general effect is desolate in the extreme.
The hills which skirt the deserts along the Valley of the Nile are
usually quite low, but at certain points they rise to the height of a
few hundred feet. Nothing grows on them, and more bare and
inhospitable places cannot be imagined. The accompanying
illustration gives a good idea of the general appearance of the stone
hills on the Nile. In the fore-ground are masses of broken stone,
sand, rocks, etc., and these stretch back to a gap in the range of
hills just below the letter A, whence, between steep rocks, a rough
road winds in and out along the dreary valley which contains the
sepulchres of the great kings of the XVIIIth, XIXth and later
dynasties. Under the light of a full moon the Valley is full of weird
beauty, but in the day-time the heat in it resembles that of a
furnace.

The chief characteristic of Egypt is the great river Nile, which has
in all ages been the source of the life and prosperity of its
inhabitants, and the principal highway of the country. The Egyptians
of the early Dynastic Period had no exact knowledge about the true
source of the river. In their hymns to the Nile-god they described
him as the “hidden one,” and “unseen,” and his “secret places” are
said to be “unknown.” The river over which he presided formed a
part of the great celestial river, or ocean, upon which sailed the
boats of the Sun-god daily. This river surrounded the whole earth,
from which, however, it was separated by a range of mountains. On
one portion of this river was placed the throne of Osiris, according to
a legend, and close by was the opening in the range of mountains
through which an arm of the celestial river flowed into the earth.
The place where the Nile appeared on earth was believed to be
situated in the First Cataract, and in late times the Nile was said to
rise there, between two mountains which were near the Island of
Elephantine and the Island of Philae. Herodotus gives the names of
these mountains as “Krôphi” and “Môphi,” and their originals have
probably been found in the old Egyptian “Qer-Ḥāpi” and “Mu-Ḥāpi”;
these names mean “Cavern of Ḥāpi” and “Water of Ḥāpi”
respectively.
The two Nile-gods and their Cavern, and the The Nile-god in his cavern,
hippopotamus goddess, who is armed with a huge under the rocks at Philae,
knife, their protectress. pouring out the waters which
formed the two Niles.
The underground caverns, or “storehouses of the Nile,” from
which the river welled up, are depicted in the illustrations here
given. In the first the cavern is guarded by a hippopotamus-headed
goddess, who is armed with a large knife and wears a feather on her
head. Above are seated two gods, one wearing a cluster of papyrus
plants on his head, and the other a cluster of lotus flowers; the
former represents the Nile of the South, and the other the Nile of
the North. Each god holds water-plants in one hand. In the second
illustration the god is depicted kneeling in his cavern, which is
enclosed by the body of a serpent; he wears a cluster of water-

plants on his head, and is pouring out from two vases the streams of
water which became the South and North Niles.
The Egyptians called both their river and the river-god “Ḥāp” or
“Ḥāpi”
𓎛𓂝(cid:0)𓊪, 𓎛𓂝(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏭𓈘(cid:0)𓈗𓀭,
a name of which the meaning
is unknown; in very early dynastic times the god was called “Ḥep-ur”
𓎛𓊪(cid:0)𓈘𓅨,
i. e., the “great Ḥep.” The name “Nile,” by which the “River
of Egypt” is generally known, is not of Egyptian origin, but is
probably derived from the Semitic word nakhal “river”; this the
Greeks turned into “Neilos,” and the Latins into “Nilus,” whence
comes the common form “Nile.” The river appears in the form of a
man wearing a cluster of water-plants on his head, and his fertility is
indicated by a large pendent breast. In the accompanying illustration
the gods of the South and North Niles are seen tying stems of the
lotus and papyrus plants round the symbol of “union”; the scene
represents the union of Upper and Lower Egypt.
The Nile-god bearing offerings of
bread, wine, fruit, flowers, etc.
The Nile-gods of the South and North tying the
stems of a lily and a papyrus plant round the
symbol of “union,” symbolizing the union of Upper
and Lower Egypt.
The ideas held by the Egyptians concerning the power of the Nile-
god are well illustrated by a lengthy Hymn to the Nile preserved on
papyrus in the British Museum (Sallier II, No. 10,182). “Homage to
thee, O Ḥāpi, thou appearest in this land, and thou comest in peace
to make Egypt to live. Thou waterest the fields which Rā hath
created, thou givest life unto all animals, and as thou descendest on
thy way from heaven thou makest the land to drink without ceasing.
Thou art the friend of bread and drink, thou givest strength to the
grain and makest it to increase, and thou fillest every place of work
with work.... Thou art the lord of fish... thou art the creator of
barley, and thou makest the temples to endure for millions of
years.... Thou art the lord of the poor and needy. If thou wert

overthrown in the heavens, the gods would fall upon their faces, and
men would perish. When thou appearest upon the earth, shouts of
joy rise up and all people are glad; every man of might receiveth
food, and every tooth is provided with meat.... Thou fillest the
storehouses, thou makest the granaries to overflow and thou hast
regard to the condition of the poor and needy. Thou makest herbs
and grain to grow that the desires of all may be satisfied, and thou
art not impoverished thereby. Thou makest thy strength to be a
shield for man.” Elsewhere he is called the “father of the gods of the
company of the gods who dwell in the celestial ocean,” and he was
declared to be self-begotten, and “One,” and in nature inscrutable.
In another passage of the same hymn it is said that the god is not
sculptured in stone, that images of him are not seen, “he is not to
be seen in inscribed shrines, there is no habitation large enough to
contain him, and thou canst not make images of him in thy heart.”
These statements suggest that statues or figures of the Nile-god
were not commonly made, and it is a fact that figures of the god,
large or small, are rare. In the fine collection of figures of Egyptian
gods exhibited in the Third Egyptian Room, which is certainly one of
the largest in the world, there is only one figure of Ḥāpi (No. 108,
Wall-case 125). In this the god wears on his head a cluster of
papyrus plants 𓇇, before which is the Utchat, or Eye of Horus, 𓂀,
and he holds an altar from which he pours out water. The only other
figure of the god in the British Museum collection is the fine
quartzite sandstone statue (Southern Egyptian Gallery, No. 766)
which was dedicated to Ȧmen-Rā by Shashanq, the son of Uasarken
and his queen Maāt-ka-Rā. Here the god bears on his out-stretched
hands an altar, from which hang down bunches of grain, green
herbs, flowers, waterfowl, etc. The statue was dedicated to Ȧmen-
Rā, who included the attributes of Ḥāp among his own.
The NILE from SEA to SOURCE
The true source of the Nile is Victoria Nyanza, or Lake
Victoria, which lies between the parallels of latitude 0° 20′ N. and
3° S., and the meridians of 31° 40′ and 35° E. of Greenwich; the

lake is 250 miles in length and 200 in breadth, and was discovered in
modern times by Speke, on August 3rd, 1858. Other contributory
sources are Albert Nyanza, or Lake Albert, discovered by Sir
Samuel Baker on March 16th, 1864, and Lake Albert Edward,
discovered by Sir H. M. Stanley in 1875; the connecting channel
between these lakes is the Semliki River. The portion of the Nile
between Lake Victoria and Lake Albert is called the “Victoria Nile”
(or the “Somerset River”); that between Lake Albert and Lake Nô is
called the “Baḥr al-Gebel” or “Upper Nile”; and that between Lake
Nô and Kharṭûm is called “Baḥr al-Abyaḍ,” or “White Nile.” The
total length of these three portions of the Nile is about 1,560 miles.
At Kharṭûm the White Nile is joined by the “Blue Nile” (or Abâî, the
Astapos of Strabo, which rises in Lake Ṣânâ and is about 1,000 miles
long), and their united streams form that portion of the river which
is commonly known as the “Nile.” The distance from Kharṭûm to the
Mediterranean Sea is about 1,913 miles, and thus the total length
of the Niles is about 3,473 miles. Between Kharṭûm and the sea
the Nile receives but one tributary, viz., the Atbara, the Astaboras of
Strabo, a torrential stream which brings into the Nile an immense
quantity of dirty red water containing valuable deposits of mud. The
Cataracts, or series of rapids, on the Nile are six in number: the
first is between Aswân and Philae, the second is a little to the
south of Wâdî Ḥalfah, the third is at Ḥannek, the fourth is at
Adramîya, the fifth is at Wâdî al-Ḥamâr, and the sixth is at
Shablûkah. On the White Nile is a series of cataracts known as the
“Fôla Falls,” and on the Blue Nile there are cataracts from Rusêres
southwards for a distance of 40 miles.
Statue of Ḥāpi the Nile-god.
[No. 766.]
The most important characteristic of the Nile is its annual flooding
or Inundation. By the end of May, in Egypt, the river is at its lowest
level. During the month of June the Nile, between Cairo and Aswân,
begins to rise, and a quantity of “green water” appears at this time.
The cause of the colour is said to be myriads of minute algae, which
subsequently putrefy and disappear. During August the river rises

rapidly, and its waters assume a red, muddy colour, which is due to
the presence of the rich red earth which is brought into the Nile by
the Blue Nile and the Atbara. The rising of the waters continues until
the middle of September, when they remain stationary for about a
fortnight or three weeks. In October a further slight rise occurs, and
then they begin to fall; the fall continues gradually until, in the May
following, they are at their lowest level once more. The cause of the
Inundation is, as Aristotle (who lived in the fourth century..) first
B C
showed, the spring and early summer rains in the mountains of
Ethiopia and the Southern Sûdân; these are brought down in
torrents by the great tributaries of the Nile, viz., the Gazelle River,
the Sobat (the Astasobas of Strabo), the Giraffe River, the Blue Nile,
and the Atbara. The Sobat rises about April 15, the Gazelle River and
the Giraffe River about the 15th of May, the Blue Nile at the end of
May, and the Atbara a little later. The united waters of these
tributaries, with the water of the Upper Nile, reach Egypt about the
end of August, and cause the Inundation to reach its highest level.
The Nile rises from 21 feet to 28 feet, and deposits a thin layer of
fertilizing mud over every part of the country reached by its waters.
Formerly, when the rise was about 26 feet, there was sufficient
water to cover the whole country; when it was less, scarcity
prevailed; and when it was more, ruin and misery appeared through
over-flooding. In recent years, the British irrigation engineers in
Egypt have regulated, by means of the Aswân Dam, the Barrage at
Asyûṭ, and the Barrage near Al-Manâshî, a little to the north of Cairo,
[2]
the supply of water during the winter, or dry season, with such
success, that, in spite of “low” Niles, the principal crops have been
saved, and the people protected from want.
In connection with the adoration of the Nile, two important
festivals were observed. The first of these took place in June and
was called the “Night of the Tear,”
(cid:0)𓈖𓇉𓄿𓏏(cid:0)𓏲(cid:0)𓏭𓇌(cid:0)𓁻,
Qerḥ en
Ḥatui, because it was believed that at this time of the year the
goddess Isis shed tears in commemoration of her first great
lamentation over the dead body of her husband Osiris. Her tears fell
into the river, and as they fell they multiplied and filled the river, and

in this way caused the Inundation. This belief exists in Egypt, in a
modified form, at the present time, and, up to the middle of last
century the Muḥammadans celebrated, with great solemnity, a
festival on the 11th day of Paoni (June 17th), which was called the
“Night of the Drop,” Lêlat al-Nuḳtah. On the night of this day a
miraculous drop of water was supposed to fall into the Nile and
cause it to rise. The second ancient Nile-festival was observed about
the middle of August, and has its equivalent in the modern
Muḥammadan festival of the “Cutting of the Dam.” A dam of earth
about 23 feet high was built in the Khalîg Canal, and when the level
of the Nile nearly reached this height, a party of workmen thinned
the upper portion of the dam at sunrise on the day following the
“completion of the Nile,” and immediately afterwards a boat was
rowed against it, and, breaking the dam, passed through it with the
current.
The history of Egypt shows that in all periods the country has
suffered from severe famines, which have been caused by
successions of “low” Niles. Thus a terrible seven years’ famine began
in.. 1066, and lasted till 1072. Dogs, cats, horses, mules, vermin
A D
fetched extravagant prices, and the people of Cairo killed and ate
each other, and human flesh was sold in the public markets. In
Genesis xli, we have another example of a seven years’ famine, and
still an older one is mentioned in an inscription cut upon a rock on
the Island of Sâḥal in the First Cataract. According to the text, this
famine took place in the reign of Tcheser, a king of the IIIrd dynasty,
about.. 4000, because there had been no satisfactory inundation
B C
of the Nile for seven years. The king says that by reason of this,
grain was very scarce, vegetables and garden produce of every
description could not be obtained, the people had nothing to eat,
and men were everywhere robbing their neighbours. Children wailed
for food, young men had no strength to move, strong men collapsed
for want of sustenance, and the aged lay in despair on the ground
waiting for death. The king wrote to Matar, the Governor of the First
Cataract, where the Nile was believed to rise, and asked him to
enquire of Khnemu, the god of the Cataract, why such calamities

were allowed to fall on the country. Subsequently the king visited
Elephantine, and was received by Khnemu, the god of the Cataract,
who told him that the Nile had failed to rise because the worship of
the gods of the Cataract had been neglected. The king promised to
dedicate offerings regularly to their temples in future, and, having
kept his promise, the Nile rose and covered the land, and filled the
country with prosperity.
Egyptian Geography.—From time immemorial Egypt has been
divided into two parts, viz., the Land of the South, Ta-Resu,
𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓇖𓊖,
and the Land of the North, Ta-Meḥt,
𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓇉𓏏(cid:0)𓊖.
The Land of the South is Upper Egypt, and its
northern limit in modern times is Cairo; the Land of the North is
Lower Egypt, i. e., the Delta, and its southern limit is Cairo. The
ancient Egyptians divided the Land of the South into twenty-two
parts, and the Land of the North into twenty parts; each such part
was called Ḥesp
𓎛𓊃(cid:0)𓊪𓈈,
a word which the Greeks rendered by
nome. Each nome was to all intents and purposes a little complete
kingdom. It was governed by a ḥeq, 𓋾𓈎, or chief man, and it
contained a capital town in which was the seat of the god of the
nome and the priesthood, and every ḥeq administered his ḥesp as
he pleased. The number of the nomes given by Greek and Roman
writers varies between thirty-six and forty-four. In late times Egypt
was divided into three parts, Upper, Central, and Lower Egypt;
Central Egypt consisted of seven nomes, and was therefore called
Heptanomis. The nomes were:
UPPER EGYPT.
Nome. Capital. God or Goddess.
1. Ta-Kens. [3] Khnemu.
Ābu. E.
LEPHANTINE
Aswân.
2. Tes-Ḥeru. Ṭeb. A M. Ḥeru-Beḥuṭet.
POLLINOPOLIS AGNA
Edfû.

3. Ten. Nekheb. E. Nekhebit.
ILEITHYIASPOLIS
Al-Kâb.
4. Uast. Uast. T (or Ȧmen-Rā.
HEBES
H ). Luxor,
ERMONTHIS
Karnak
5. Ḥerui. Ḳebti. C. Ḳuft. Ȧmsu, or Menu.
OPTOS
6. Ȧati. Taenterert. T. Hathor.
ENTYRIS
Denderah.
7. Seshesh. Ḥa. D P. Ḥau. Hathor.
IOSPOLIS ARVA
8. Ȧbt. Teni. T. Ȧn-Ḥer.
HIS
9.... Ȧpu. P. Ahkmîm. Ȧmsu or Menu.
ANOPOLIS
10. Uatchet. Ṭebu. A. Hathor.
PHRODITOPOLIS
11. Set. Shas-ḥetep. H. Khnemu.
YPSELIS
Shutb.
12. Ṭu-... Nut-ent-bȧk. Horus.
H.
IERAKONPOLIS
13. Ȧm-f-khent. Saut. L. Asyûṭ. Ȧp-uat.
YKOPOLIS
14. Ȧm-f-peḥ. Kesi. K. Al-Kusîyah. Hathor.
USAE
15. Unt. Khemennu. H. Thoth.
ERMOPOLIS
Ashmnûnên.
16. Maḥetch. Ḥebennu. Horus.
17. Ȧnpu(?). Kasa. K. Al-Kês. Anubis.
YNONPOLIS
18. Sepṭ. Ḥet-suten. A -H. Anubis.
L ÎBAH
19. Bu-tchamui. Pa-Mātchet. Set.
O. Bahnassâ.
XYRRHYNCHUS
20. Ȧm-Khent. Suten-ḥenen. Ḥeru-shefit.
H M.
ERAKLEOPOLIS AGNA
Ahnâs. (The Hânês of
the Bible.)
21. Ȧm-peḥ. Smen-Ḥeru. Khnemu.
22. Maten. Ṭep-Ȧḥet. Hathor.
A. Atfîḥ.
PHRODITOPOLIS
LOWER EGYPT.

Nome. Capital. God or Goddess.
1. Ȧneb-ḥetch. Men-nefert. M. Ptaḥ.
EMPHIS
Mît-Rahînah.
2. Ȧa. Sekhem. L. Ḥeru-ur.
ETOPOLIS
3. Ȧment. Pa-neb-Ȧmt. A. Hathor.
PIS
4. Sȧpi-Rest. Tchekā. Ȧmen-Rā.
5. Sȧpi-Meḥt. Saut. S. Ṣâ. Neith.
AÏS
6. Ka-semt. Khasut. X. Ȧmen-Rā.
OÏS
7. Nefer-Ȧment. Pa-Aḥu-neb-Ȧment. Ḥu.
Metelis (?).
8. Nefer-Ȧbt. Thekaut (Succoth), Atem, or Temu.
Pa-Tem (Pithom).
P. Tall al-
ATUMOS
Maskhûṭah.
9. Ȧthi(?). Pa-Ȧsȧr. B. Abû- Osiris.
USIRIS
Ṣîr.
10. Ka-Qam. Ḥet-ta-ḥer-ȧbt. Ḥeru-Khenti-
A. Khati.
THRIBIS
11. Ka-ḥeseb. Ḥesbet(?), Ka- Isis, or Sebek.
Ḥebset(?). K.
ABASOS
12. Theb-... Theb-neter(?). Ȧn-Ḥer.
S. Sammanûd.
EBENNYTOS
13. Ḥeq-āṭ. Ȧnnu (The On of the Temu.
Bible). H.
ELIOPOLIS
Maṭarîyah.
14. Khent-ȧbt. Tchal. T. Ṣân. Horus.
ANIS
15. Teḥuti. Pa-Teḥuti. H Thoth.
ERMOPOLIS
M.
INOR
16. Ḥātmeḥit. Pa-Ba-neb Ṭeṭ. M. Osiris.
ENDES
Tmai al-Amdîd.
17. Sam- Pa-Khen-en-Ȧmen. Ȧmen-Rā.
Beḥuṭet. D.
IOSPOLIS
18. Ȧm-Khent. Pa-Bast. P Bast.
IBESETH
B. Tall Basṭah.
UBASTIS
19. Ȧm-peḥ. Pa-Uatchet. B. Uatchet.
UTO

20. Sepṭ. Kesem. P. Fakûs. Sepṭ.
HAKUSSA
The Sûdân was divided into 13 nomes:
1. Peḥ-Qennes. The region south of Meroë.
2. Maruat. Meroë. Bagrawîr. Ȧmen.
3. Napt. Napata. Ȧmen.
4. Peten-Ḥeru. Pontyris. Horus.
5. Pa-Nebset. Pnups. Thoth.
6. Ta-Uatchet. Autoba (?).
7. Behent. Boôn. Wâdî Ḥalfah. Horus.
8. Ȧtefthit. Tasitia (?).
9. Nehȧu. Noa.
10. Meḥit. Meae. Horus.
11. Maamet. Ibrîm. Horus.
12. Bekt. Bok. Kubbân. Horus.
13. Ḥet-Khent. P-ȧlek. Philae. Bilâk. Isis.
Under the Ptolemies, the district between Elephantine and Philae
was called Dodekaschoinos, because it contained twelve schoinoi,
or measures of land, but later this term was applied to the whole
region between Elephantine and Hiera Sykaminos.
Under the late Roman emperors many of the nomes were
subdivided, probably for convenience in levying taxes, and in still
later times the governor of a nome, or province, bore the title of
Duke (Δουξ).
Modern Egypt is divided into 14 provinces:
LOWER EGYPT.
Province. Capital.
1. Baḥêrah. Damanhûr.
2. Ḳalyûbîyah. Benha.
3. Sharkîyah. Zaḳâzîḳ.
4. Dakhâlîyah. Manṣûrah.
5. Manûfîyah. Menûf.

6. Gharbîyah. Ṭanṭa.
UPPER EGYPT.
Province. Capital.
1. Gîzah. Gîzah.
2. Beni-Suwêf. Beni-Suwêf.
3. Minyah. Minyah.
4. Asyûṭ. Asyûṭ.
5. Girgah. Ṣûhâḳ.
6. Ḳena. Ḳena.
7. Nûba. Aswân.
8. Fayyûm. Madînat al-Fayyûm.
The towns of Cairo, Alexandria, Port Sa’îd, Suez, Damietta, etc.,
are generally governed each by a native ruler.
The provinces of the Sûdân are as follows:
1. Baḥr al-Ghazâl. 2. Berber. 3. Blue Nile Province. 4. Dongola. 5.
Ḥalfah. 6. Kassala. 7. Kharṭûm Province. 8. Kordofân. 9. Mongalla.
10. Red Sea Province. 11. Sennaar. 12. Upper Nile Province. 13.
White Nile Province.

CHAPTER II.
E. T L P. N C. P. L.
THNOGRAPHY HE AND OF UNT ATIONAL HARACTER OPULATION ANGUAGE
F O W. D E H. Y
ORMS F RITING ECIPHERMENT OF GYPTIAN IEROGLYPHICS OUNG AND
C. H A W. W M.
HAMPOLLION IEROGLYPHIC LPHABET AND RITING RITING ATERIALS
The Egyptians.—The evidence of the monuments and the
literature of Egypt proves that the Egyptians were of African origin,
and that they were akin to the light-skinned peoples who inhabited
the north-east portion of the African Continent. Further evidence of
this fact is supplied by the “table of nations” preserved in the tenth
chapter of Genesis, where it is stated that Cush and Mizraim were the
sons of Ham. Now this Cush, or Ethiopia, is not the country which we
call Abyssinia, but the Northern Sûdân, or Nubia; therefore the
Nubians (Cush) and the Egyptians (Mizraim) were brethren, and they
were Hamites, or Africans. The relationship between the Nubians and
the Egyptians is also asserted by Diodorus, who declared that the
Egyptians were descended from a colony of Ethiopians, i. e., Nubians,
who had settled in Egypt. And there is no doubt that from the earliest
to the latest times a very close bond existed between the Northern
Nubians and the Egyptians, which manifested itself in the religion and
religious ceremonies of both peoples. The Cushites were dark in
colour, sometimes actually black, but there is no evidence which
proves they were negroes; and the Egyptians were red, or brown-red,
or reddish yellow in colour. On the west of the Nile Valley lived the
fair-skinned Libyans; on the east the remote ancestors of the
Blemmyes and the modern Bîshârî tribes, who were of a light
brownish colour, and on the south, near the Equator, were negro
tribes, which formed part of the great belt of black peoples that
extended right across Africa, from sea to sea.
The dynastic Egyptians appear to have regarded a country, or
district, called Pun
𓊪(cid:0)𓃹(cid:0)𓈖𓏏(cid:0)𓈉
as their original home, and they

certainly preserved down to the latest times some of the peculiarities
in dress of the primitive inhabitants of that region. That Punt was
situated a considerable distance to the south of Egypt is certain, and
that it could be reached by land, and also by water by way of the Red
Sea, is clear from the inscriptions, but there is no evidence available
which enables the exact limits of the country to be defined. The
despatch of several expeditions to Punt by the Egyptians is recorded,
for the purpose of bringing back ānti spice,
𓂝(cid:0)𓈖𓅂𓏊(cid:0)𓏧,
or myrrh,
which was used freely for embalming purposes. They started from
some point on the Red Sea near the modern town of Ḳuṣêr, and sailed
southwards until they reached the river of the port of Punt which was
situated on the east coast of Africa, probably in Somaliland. The
expedition despatched by Queen Ḥātshepset about.. 1550 brought
B C
back boomerangs, a huge pile of myrrh, logs of ebony, elephants’
tusks, sweet-smelling woods, eye-paint, various kinds of spices, dog-
headed apes, monkeys, leopard (or panther) skins, “green” (i. e., pale)
gold, and gold rings which are to this day used as currency in East
Africa and are known as “ring money.” Now, all these things are
products of the region which lies between the southern end of the
Red Sea, the Indian Ocean, and the Valley of the Nile, and it is
impossible not to conclude that Punt was situated somewhere in it.
The Egyptian expeditions probably sailed up a river for a considerable
distance, to a point where the products of Punt were brought by
trading caravans for export, and there the Egyptians bartered for the
myrrh, etc., which they required. The market place must have been
inland, for the huts of the natives are represented in the bas-reliefs as
standing close to the river.
The men of Punt wore a pointed beard and a loin cloth, which
was kept in position by a kind of belt, from which hung down behind
the tail of an animal. The beard of the Egyptian was also pointed,
and gods, kings, and priestly officials on solemn, ceremonial
occasions, wore tails. Thus in the Papyrus of Ani (Judgment Scene)
the gods Thoth and Anubis wear tails, and the priestly official in the
same scene wears the leopard’s skin, the tail of which is supposed to
be hanging behind him. In two statues of Ȧmen-ḥetep III (Northern

Egyptian Gallery, Nos. 412, 413), the tail is supposed to be brought
forward under the body of the king, and its end is carefully sculptured
on the space between his legs. The custom of wearing tails is
common in Central Africa at the present day, even the women, in
some places, wearing long tails of bast (Schweinfurth, Heart of Africa,
I, p. 295); and a recent traveller reports that the Gazum people wear
tails, about six inches long, for which they dig holes in the ground
when they sit down (Boyd Alexander, From the Niger, I, p. 78). Many
other points of comparison between the Egyptians and the peoples of
Central Africa could be mentioned in proof of the views that the
indigenous dynastic Egyptians were connected with the people of
Punt, and that Punt was situated in the South-Eastern Sûdân.
As to the succession of peoples in the Nile Valley, or rather of
that portion of it which is called Egypt, many theories have been
formulated in recent years. Some of the most competent authorities
think that the earliest dwellers in Egypt were black folk, who were
driven out or killed off by a race of people who possessed many of
the characteristics of the Libyans, and who came from the west, or
south-west, and took possession of Egypt. It is thought that the next
invasions of the country were made by peoples who came from the
east, or south-east, and, having settled down on the Nile, mingled
with the inhabitants. After these it seems very probable that Egypt
was invaded by tribes whose home was some part of Western Asia,
probably the country now called Southern Babylonia. Some think that
they entered Egypt by the Isthmus of Suez, and others that they
crossed from Arabia to Africa by the straits of Bâb al-Mandib at the
southern end of the Red Sea. Another view is that the invaders
entered Egypt by the Wâdî Ḥammâmât, and that they arrived on the
Nile at some place near the modern town of Ḳena. Little by little the
invaders conquered the country, and introduced into it the arts of
agriculture, brick-making, writing, working in metals, etc. Wheat,
barley, and the domestic sheep seem to have been brought into Egypt
about this time. The manners and customs of the new comers were
very different from those of the men they conquered, and their
civilization was of a much higher character than that of the primitive
Egyptians; but, among the great bulk of the population, the beliefs,

religion, and habits continued to preserve unchanged their
characteristic African nature.
1 2 3 4 5 6
What the physical form of the primitive, pre-dynastic Egyptian was
cannot be said, but it is probable that he resembled the dynastic
Egyptians whose pictures are seen by hundreds in the tombs. If this
be so, he was tall, slender of body, with long thin legs, small hands,
and long feet. His hair was black and curly, but must not be
confounded with the “wool” of the negro, his eyes black and slightly
almond-shaped, his cheek-bones high and often prominent, his nose
straight—sometimes aquiline—and inclined to be fleshy; his mouth
wide, with somewhat full lips, his teeth small and regular and his chin
prominent, because his under jaw was thrust slightly forward. The
women were yellowish in colour, probably because their bodies were
not so much exposed to the rays of the sun as those of the men. The
general character of the physique of the Egyptian has remained
practically unchanged to the present day, and no admixture of foreign
elements has affected it permanently.
7 8
Ivory figure of a king. Bone figure of a dwarf.
1st dynasty (?) Archaïc Period.
[No. 197, Table-case L, [No. 42, Table-case L,
Third Egyptian Room.] Third Egyptian Room.]
9 10
Bone figure of a woman Bone figure of a
carrying a child on her woman, with
shoulder. inlaid lapis-lazuli
eyes.
Archaïc Period.
Archaïc Period.
[No. 41, Table-case L,
Third Egyptian Room.] [No. 40, Table-
case L, Third
Egyptian Room.]
The physical features and dress of the primitive dynastic Egyptians
are well illustrated by the accompanying drawings and photographs.

From Nos. 1-6 (page 23) we see that their hair was short and curly,
their noses long and pointed, their eyes almond-shaped, their beards
pointed, their arms and legs long, their hands large, and their feet
long and flat. They wear in their hair feathers, probably red feathers
from the tails of parrots, such as are worn at the present day, and
their loin cloths are fastened round their bodies by belts, from which
hang short, bushy tails of jackals(?). No. 1 bears a hawk-standard,
the symbol of the god of the tribe, and is armed with a mace having a
diamond-shaped head. No. 2 bears a hawk-standard and wields a
double-headed stone axe. No. 3 is armed with a mace and a bow. No.
4 is shooting a flint-tipped arrow from a bow. No. 5 is armed with a
boomerang and a spear, and No. 6 with a mace and a boomerang.
The above illustrations are drawn from the green slate shield
exhibited in Table-case L in the Third Egyptian Room.
To about the same period belongs the ivory figure of a king here
reproduced (No. 7). He wears the Crown of the South, and a garment
worked with an elaborate diamond pattern. The nose is flatter and
more fleshy than in the drawings from the slate shield, and the lips
are fuller and firmer. In figures 8-10 we have representations of the
women of the Archaïc Period, about.. 4200. No. 8 is a female
B C
dwarf, or perhaps a woman who belonged to one of the pygmy tribes
that lived near the Equator. No. 9 is a most interesting figure, for it
illustrates the hair-dressing and dress of the period. The features of
the child, who is carried partly on the back and partly on the left
shoulder, as at the present day, are well preserved. No. 10 represents
a woman of slim build, with blue eyes, and wearing an elaborate
head-dress, which falls over her shoulders.
PORTRAIT FIGURES OF OFFICIALS OF THE IIIRD OR IVTH DYNASTY. ABOUT B. C. 3700.
Figure of Betchmes, a royal kinsman. Painted limestone figure of Nefer-hi.
[Vestibule, South Wall, No. 3.] [No. 150, Wall-case 99, Third Egyptian
Room.]
National Character.—Herodotus, who was an acute observer of
the manners and customs of the Egyptians, states (ii, 64) that the
Egyptians were “beyond measure scrupulous in all matters

appertaining to religion,” and the monuments prove him to be
absolutely correct. The Egyptian worshipped his God, whose chief
symbol to him was the sun, daily and regularly, and prayed to him
morning and evening. His attitude towards his Maker was one of
absolute resignation. The power of God, as displayed by the Sun,
and the River Nile, and other forces of nature filled him with awe, and
made him to realize his helplessness. His views as to the dependence
of men on the sun are well illustrated by the following extract from a
hymn to Ȧten, the god of the Solar Disk: “When thou settest in the
western horizon of heaven, the earth becometh dark with the
darkness of the dead. Men sleep in their houses, their heads are
covered up, their nostrils are closed, and no man can see his
neighbour; everything which they possess could be stolen from under
their heads without their knowing it. All the lions come forth from
their dens, every creeping thing biteth, the smithy is in blackness, and
all the earth is silent because he who made them (i. e., all creatures)
resteth in his horizon. When the dawn cometh, and thou risest and
shinest from the Disk, darkness flieth away, thou givest forth thy rays,
and the Two Lands (i. e., Egypt) are in festival. Men rise up, they
stand upon their feet—it is thou who hast raised them—they wash
their bodies, and dress themselves in their clothes, and they [stretch
out] their hands to thee in thanksgiving for thy rising.” To the god of
the city, or local deity, he also paid due reverence. He worshipped
Osiris, the type and symbol of the resurrection, most truly, for on his
help and succour depended his hope of eternal life. The Egyptians,
who were men of means, spent largely during their lifetime in making
preparations for their death, and they spared neither money nor pains
in their endeavours to secure for themselves life in the Other World.
They observed the Religious and Civil Laws most carefully, and any
breach they might make in either they thought could be amply atoned
for by making offerings or payment.
The fox playing the double pipes for a flock of goats to march to.
[From a papyrus in the British Museum, No. 10,016.]
A mouse seated on a chair, with a table of food before it. A cat is presenting to it a
palm branch, and behind it is a mouse bearing a fan, etc.
[From a papyrus in the British Museum, No. 10,016.]

The Egyptian was easy and simple in disposition, and fond of
pleasure and of the good things of this world. He loved eating and
drinking, and he lost no opportunity of enjoying himself. The literature
of all periods is filled with passages in which the living are exhorted to
be happy; and we may note that in the famous Dialogue between a
man who is weary of life and his soul, the latter tells the man that to
remember the grave only brings sorrow to the heart and fills the eyes
with tears. And after several observations of the same import, the
soul says: “Hearken unto me, for, behold, it is good for men to
[4]
hearken; follow after pleasure and forget care.” In the Song of the
Harper we read: “Bodies (i. e., men) have come into being in order to
pass away since the time of Rā, and young men come in their places.
Rā placeth himself in the sky in the morning, and Temu setteth in the
Mountain of Sunset. Men beget children and women bring forth, and
every nostril snuffeth the wind of dawn from the time of their birth to
the day when they go to the place which is assigned to them. Make
[thy] day happy! Let there be perfumes and sweet odours for thy
nostrils, and let there be wreaths of flowers and lilies for the neck and
shoulders of thy beloved sister who shall be seated by thy side. Let
there be songs and the music of the harp before thee, and setting
behind thy back unpleasant things of every kind, remember only
pleasure, until the day cometh wherein thou must travel to the land
which loveth silence.”
A cat herding geese.
[From a papyrus in the British Museum, No.
10,016.]
The advice to eat, drink, and be happy, is also given to a high-
priest of Memphis by his dead wife That-I-em-ḥetep on her sepulchral
tablet (Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 29, No. 1027). She says: “Hail,
[5]
my brother, husband, friend,... let not thy heart cease to drink
water, to eat bread, to drink wine, to love women, to make a happy
day, and to seek thy heart’s desire by day and by night. And set no
care whatsoever in thy heart: are the years which [we pass] upon the
earth so many [that we need do this]?”
The lion and the unicorn playing a game of draughts.

[From a papyrus in the British Museum, No. 10,016.]
The morality of the Egyptians was of a high character, and
certainly higher than that of Oriental nations in general. Many of the
Precepts of Ptaḥ-ḥetep, Kaqemna, and Khensu-ḥetep bear comparison
with the moral maxims of the Books of Proverbs and Ecclesiasticus.
The view of the Egyptian as to his duty towards his neighbour is
well summed up by Pepi-Nekht, an old feudal lord of Elephantine,
who flourished under the VIth dynasty, and said: “I am one who
spoke good and repeated what was liked. Never did I say an evil word
of any kind to a chief against anyone, for I wished it to be well with
me before the great god. I gave bread to the hungry man, and
clothes to the naked man. I never gave judgment in a case between
two brothers whereby a son was deprived of his father’s goods. I was
loved by my father, favoured by my mother, and beloved by my
brothers and sisters.” Love of parents and home was a strong trait
in the character of the Egyptian; and it was one cause of his hatred of
military service and of any occupation which would take him away
from his town or village. He prayed, too, that in the Other World he
might have his parents, wife, children, and relatives, with him on his
farm in the Fields of Peace, and that when his spirit was on the way
thither, the spirits of his kinsfolk would come to meet him, armed with
their staves and weapons, so that they might protect him from the
attack of hostile spirits. Like all African people he loved music,
singing, and dancing, and was attracted by ceremonials,
processions, and display of every kind; the satirical papyri (see the
illustrations on pages 27-30), and even the wall-paintings in the
tombs, show that he possessed a keen sense of humour. The
peasant was then, as now, a laborious toiler, and as he was literally
the slave of Pharaoh for thousands of years, the ideas of freedom
and national independence, as we understand them, were wholly
unknown to him.
All classes were intensely superstitious, and they believed firmly
in the existence of spirits, good and bad, witches, and fiends and
devils, which they tried to cajole, or wheedle, or placate with gifts, or
to vanquish by means of spells, magical names, words of power,
amulets of all kinds, etc. The magician was the real priest, to the

lower classes at least, as he is to this day in Central Africa, for by the
use of magical figures he assured his clients that he could procure
for them the death, or sickness, of an enemy, riches, the love of
women, dreams wherein the future would be revealed to them, and
above all, the assistance of the gods. We find that about.. 312 a
B C
service was regularly performed in the temple of Ȧmen-Rā at Thebes
to make the sun rise. In the course of it a figure of the monster Āpep,
who was supposed to be lying in wait to swallow the Sun-god, was
made of wax, then wrapped in new papyrus on which the “accursed
name” of the fiend was written in green ink, and solemnly burned in a
fire fed by a special kind of herb, whilst the priest spurned it with his
left foot and poured out curses on each of the thirty “accursed
names” of the evil one. As the wax melted and was consumed,
together with the papyrus and the green ink with which his name was
written, so the body of Āpep was believed to be consumed in the
flames of the rising sun in the eastern sky.
The spearing of Āpep.
From the evidence given at Thebes about.. 1200 against certain
B C
officials who were implicated in a case of conspiracy against Rameses
III, it appeared that a certain man had stolen a book of magic from
the temple library. From this he obtained instructions how to make
the wax figures which caused the sickness, quakings of the limbs, and
death of those in whose forms they were made. An example of the
wax figures which were used in the Ptolemaïc period is exhibited in
Table-case C in the Third Egyptian Room, No. 198. The core is made
of inscribed papyrus, and in front, in the centre, is a piece of hair,
presumably that of the person on whom the magician who made the
figure sought to exert his influence. Every act of daily life had some
magical or religious observance associated with it, and every day,
either in whole or in part, was declared to be lucky or unlucky, in
accordance with a series of events which were represented by the
Calendar of lucky and unlucky days.
Superstition played as prominent a part in medicine as in religion.
The practice of dismembering the dead in primitive times must have

taught the Egyptians some practical anatomy, and the operations
connected with mummification in the later period must have added
largely to their knowledge of the arrangement of the principal internal
organs of the body. The Egyptians were well acquainted with the
importance of the heart in the human economy, and they appear to
have had some knowledge of the functions of the arteries. A
considerable number of medical prescriptions have come down to
us, e. g., those which are inscribed on a papyrus in the British
Museum (No. 10,059) and are said to be as old as the time of Khufu
(Cheops), a king of the IVth dynasty, and those of the Ebers Papyrus,
of the XVIIIth dynasty; from these it is easy to see that they closely
resemble in many particulars the prescriptions given in English
medical books printed two or three hundred years ago. Powders and
decoctions made from plants and seeds were largely used, and the
piths of certain trees, dates, sycamore-figs, and other fruits, salt,
magnesia, oil, honey, sweet beer, formed the principal ingredients of
many prescriptions. With these were often mixed substances of an
unpleasant nature, e. g., bone dust, rancid fat, the droppings of
animals, etc. In order that certain drugs might have the desired effect
it was necessary for the physician to recite a magical formula four
times (Ebers Papyrus CVIII). Other medicines again owed their
efficacy to the belief that they had been actually taken by one or
other of the gods whilst they reigned upon earth, and the authorship
of certain prescriptions was ascribed to Rā. Thus according to the
Ebers Papyrus (XLVI) Rā suffered from attacks of boils of a most
malignant kind, and he made up a salve, containing sixteen
ingredients, which gave him instant relief, and which was therefore
certain to cure ordinary mortals. The following is a characteristic
example of a prescription which, as is evident, contains a number of
substances which are well known to be good for inflamed eyes, and
also some others the special value of which is not clear:—
𓎡(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓂧(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓂡𓇉𓄿𓍘𓏭(cid:0)𓅓𓁹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏤 “Another
[prescription] for
driving

inflammation
from the eye.
𓂝(cid:0)𓈖𓅂𓈒(cid:0)𓏦 Myrrh 1
𓎃𓏤𓏜𓏪𓅨(cid:0)𓂋𓈒(cid:0)𓏦 ‘Great 1
Protectors’
seed
𓍱(cid:0)𓊃𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓈒 Oxide of 1
copper
𓍑𓄿𓂋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓈒(cid:0)𓏦 Citron pips 1
𓎼𓄿𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓆰𓎖(cid:0)𓏲(cid:0)𓏰 Northern 1
cypress
flowers
𓇅𓏲(cid:0)𓈒𓏪 Antimony 1
𓈎𓄿𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓐎𓏪𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓎼𓎛𓋴𓄛 Gazelle 1
droppings
𓏶𓅓𓏭𓈖(cid:0)𓈎𓄿𓂧𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓄛 Oryx offal 1
𓌻(cid:0)𓂋𓎛𓏏(cid:0)𓏊𓏪𓌉𓆓(cid:0)𓏏𓇳 White oil 1
[Directions for use.]
𓂞𓁷(cid:0)𓏤𓈗𓁀 “Place in water,
let stand for one
𓂜(cid:0)(cid:0)𓐎(cid:0)𓂝
night, strain
𓁷(cid:0)𓂋𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏽𓎡(cid:0)𓇌𓆓(cid:0)𓂧
through a cloth,
𓎘𓎛𓏲(cid:0)𓂡𓐍(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓎡𓋴𓏏𓅓 and smear over
[the eye] for four
𓆄𓆃𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓈖(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓅬
days; or,
according to
another
prescription,
paint it on [the
eye] with a
[6]
goose-feather.”
The Egyptian physician was called upon not only to heal his
patients, but to beautify them, and we find prescriptions for removing
scurf from the skin, for changing the colour of the skin, for making

the skin smooth, and the following for removing wrinkles from the
face:—
𓎡(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓂧(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓂡𓈎(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓆑𓏲(cid:0)𓏼𓏌(cid:0)𓏤𓁷(cid:0)𓏤 “Another
[prescription]
for driving
away
wrinkles of
the face.”
𓅮𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓈒(cid:0)𓏼𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓊹𓌣𓏏(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓈒(cid:0)𓏼 Ball of 1
incense
𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓎛𓈒(cid:0)𓏼 Wax 1
𓆮𓏊(cid:0)𓏼𓇅𓆓(cid:0)𓏛 Fresh oil 1
𓎼𓇋𓏲𓆰(cid:0)𓏥 Cypress 1
berries
[Directions for use.]
(cid:0)𓏌(cid:0)𓂡𓏟𓏜𓂋(cid:0)𓂞𓁷(cid:0)𓏤 “Crush, and
rub down
𓎛𓋴𓐠𓄿𓈗𓏊(cid:0)𓏼𓂋(cid:0)𓂞
and put in
𓂋(cid:0)𓁷(cid:0)𓏤𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓏿𓁹(cid:0)𓌴𓁹𓄿𓄿𓎡
new milk and
apply it to
the face for
six days.
Take good
heed [to
[7]
this].”
The population of Egypt was, in 1897, 9,734,405 persons, of
whom 8,978,775 were Muḥammadans, 25,200 Jews, and 730,162
Christians. The last census was taken on the 29th April, 1907, and the
entire population of the country consisted of 11,272,000 persons, or
nearly 16 per cent. more than in 1897.
The Egyptian Language is not Semitic, although it possesses
many characteristics which resemble those of the Semitic languages,
but in a less developed form. Of all the views on the subject which

have been held in recent years, the most plausible one is that which
makes Egyptian belong to the group of Proto-Semitic languages. The
Egyptian and the Semitic languages appear to have sprung from a
common stock, from which they separated before their grammars and
vocabularies were consolidated. The Egyptian language developed
rapidly under circumstances of which nothing is known, and then,
apparently, became crystallized; the Semitic language developed less
rapidly, but continued to develope for centuries after the growth of
the Egyptian language was arrested. To the period when Egyptian
separated itself from the parent stock no date can be assigned, but it
must have taken place some thousands of years before Christ. Later,
under the XVIIIth and XIXth dynasties,.. 1550 to 1300, a large
B C
number of Semitic words were introduced into the language, and in
such compositions as the “Travels of an Egyptian” (see page 70) a
great many are transcribed into Egyptian characters.
The Egyptian language as known to us appears in four divisions,
viz.:—
1. The Egyptian of the Early Empire, which was studied and
employed for literary purposes from about.. 4400 to about.. 200.
B C A D
2. The Egyptian used in the ordinary business of life and for
conversation, from about.. 2600 to 650.
B C
3. The popular speech of the country, from about 600 or 500.. to
B C
the end of the Roman Period.
4. The ordinary language of the country, after Christianity was
introduced into it; this is called Coptic. It ceased to be used in Egypt
as a spoken language, probably about the twelfth century, but the
Holy Scriptures and the Services are in several places in Egypt read in
Coptic on Sundays and Festivals, although very few people
understand what is being read. Four dialects of Coptic are
distinguished: (1) That of Upper Egypt, called “Sahidic.” (2) That of
Lower Egypt, called “Boheiric.” (3) The dialect of Ṣûhâḳ and its
neighbourhood. (4) The dialect of the district of the Fayyûm. It is a
noteworthy fact that, from the beginning of the second century of our
era to the twelfth, the language of ancient Egypt was preserved, in a

modified form, chiefly through the translations of the Holy Scriptures,
which were made from Greek into Coptic.
A page of hieratic writing from the Great Harris Papyrus.
Egyptian Writing was of three kinds, which are called
“Hieroglyphic,” “Hieratic,” and “Demotic.” The oldest form is the
hieroglyphic (i. e., sacred engraved writing), or purely pictorial,
which was employed in inscriptions upon temples, tombs, statues,
sepulchral tablets, etc., and for monumental purposes generally. At a
very early period it was found that the hieroglyphic form of writing
was cumbrous, and that in cases where it was important to write
quickly on papyrus, the pictorial characters were inconvenient. The
scribes, therefore, began first to modify, and secondly to abbreviate
the pictorial characters, and at length the form of writing called
hieratic (i. e., the priests’ writing) was developed. Hieratic was a style
of cursive writing much used by the priests in copying literary
compositions on papyrus from the IVth or Vth dynasty to the XXVIth
dynasty. This form of writing is well illustrated by the above
reproduction of a page from the Great Harris Papyrus in the British
Museum (No. 9999), which was written about.. 1200. The text is
B C
read from right to left, and the following is a transcript into
hieroglyphic characters of the first two lines:—
1.
𓆓(cid:0)𓂧𓇋(cid:0)𓈖𓇓𓏏(cid:0)𓈖𓀭𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓌷(cid:0)𓏏𓆄𓌻𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓀭(cid:0)𓍺
𓀭𓋹𓍑𓋴𓅮𓄿𓊹𓀭𓉻(cid:0)𓏛𓐍(cid:0)𓂋𓀙𓏲𓀀𓏪𓄂(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏲(cid:0)𓏭𓏴(cid:0)𓂻𓀀𓏪𓏌(cid:0)𓏤𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓀎𓀀𓏪
𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓏏(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓆳𓄛(cid:0)𓏦𓆷𓄿𓏭(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓂧𓏤𓄿𓈖(cid:0)𓄿𓌙𓀀𓏪𓌔(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏤𓀀𓏪𓆈(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏦
2.
𓋹𓈖(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏲𓀀𓏥(cid:0)𓎟𓏌(cid:0)𓏤𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓈖𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓌻𓇋𓆳𓊖(cid:0)𓊖𓄔𓅓𓏜𓏲(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏦
𓂞(cid:0)𓏲𓀭𓂝(cid:0)𓌴𓄿𓅓𓏲(cid:0)𓁻𓏏(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏦𓅓𓈖(cid:0)𓄿𓇌𓏪𓀭𓅜𓐍(cid:0)𓏲𓏜𓏪𓇋𓀁𓁹(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏲
𓀭𓇋𓏲𓀭𓅓𓇓𓏏(cid:0)𓈖𓀭𓈖𓂋(cid:0)𓐍𓇌𓅛𓀀𓁐𓏪𓃹(cid:0)𓈖𓅮𓄿𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓈖
Between the end of the XXIInd and the beginning of the XXVIth
dynasty the scribes, wishing to simplify hieratic still further,
constructed from it a purely conventional system of signs from which
most of the prominent characteristics of the hieroglyphic, or pictures,
that had been preserved in the hieratic characters, disappeared. This

new form of writing was called demotic (i. e., the people’s writing),
but it was known among some of the early Egyptologists as
enchorial (i. e., native writing, or writing of the country). On the
Rosetta Stone (Egyptian Gallery, No. 960) the visitor will see an
example of the hieroglyphic and demotic forms of writing placed
one above the other, and in the text we find that the hieroglyphic
portion is called “the writing of the divine words,” or letters, 𓏟𓈖𓊹𓌃𓏪,
and the demotic “the writing of books,” i. e., rolls of papyrus,
𓏟𓋔𓈚(cid:0)𓂝𓇌𓍽.
The invention of the art of writing was assigned to
the god Thoth, who was the great scribe of the gods, and who is
frequently represented holding a writing palette and a reed pen, and
the hieroglyphics, or picture signs, were, therefore, called “divine,
sacred, or holy.” Hieroglyphics were used for monumental purposes
until about the end of the third century.., but it is tolerably certain
A D
that very few people could read them or understand them.
Demotic Writing.
During the Ptolemaïc Period, though Greek was the language of
the kings and the upper classes of the country, the temples were
covered with inscriptions in hieroglyphics, and the Ptolemies and the
Romans adopted old Egyptian titles, and had their names transcribed
into hieroglyphics and cut in cartouches like the Pharaohs. In the
reigns of Euergetes I (.. 267 to 222) and Epiphanes (.. 205 to
B C B C
181) the priests promulgated decrees in honour of their kings which
were cut on slabs of basalt in the hieroglyphic, demotic, and Greek
characters, but on the sepulchral tablets of the period the inscriptions
are usually in hieroglyphics alone, because the natives throughout the
country clung to these characters, which had, from time immemorial,
been associated with their religious beliefs and ceremonies. In the
Southern Egyptian Gallery, however, are exhibited several tablets
which are inscribed in demotic as well as in hieroglyphics, and of
these may be noted the tablet of Tut-i-em-ḥetep (No. 1028, Bay 25),
who died.. 118; the tablet of Khā-em-ḥrȧ (No. 997, Bay 25); and
B C
the tablet of Peṭā Bast (No. 1030, Bay 27). In the Roman Period we
find that the use of demotic sometimes superseded that of
hieroglyphics in public documents, and as an example of this may be

mentioned the fine sandstone tablet inscribed, wholly in demotic, with
a decree recording the dedication of certain properties to the gods
who were worshipped at Karnak (Thebes) in the first century of our
era (No. 993, Bay 27). This tablet was found at Karnak, in the Hall of
Columns, where, no doubt, it was set up originally, and its inscription
was cut in demotic, because, at that period, that form of writing was
better understood than hieroglyphics. In the Roman Period
hieroglyphic inscriptions were sometimes accompanied by renderings
into Greek and Latin, e. g., No. 257, Third Egyptian Room, Wall-case
No. 109. This is a portion of a statue of a priest bearing a shrine of
Osiris. On the back of the plinth is an inscription in hieroglyphics
containing an address to Osiris by a priest of the “fourth order,” and
on one side of the plinth are cut in Latin and Greek “priest bearing
Osiris.”
Coptic is written with the letters of the Greek alphabet, and seven
signs (ϣ, ϥ, ϧ, ϩ, ϫ, ϭ, ϯ), derived from demotic characters, the
phonetic values of which could not be expressed by Greek letters. A
fine collection of sepulchral tablets inscribed in Coptic is exhibited in
the Southern Egyptian Gallery (Bay 32), and a long and most
instructive series of drafts of documents on potsherds and slices of
limestone will be found in Table-case M in the Fourth Egyptian Room.
In the copy of the Lord’s Prayer (St. Matthew vi, 9) here appended
the reader will find all the signs which are peculiar to Coptic save one
(ϭ). The dialect is that of Lower Egypt. The two words marked by
asterisks are Greek, not Egyptian.
ⲡⲉⲛⲓⲱⲧ ⲉⲧϧⲉⲛ ⲛⲓⲫⲏⲟⲩⲓ ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥⲧⲟⲩⲃⲟ
Peniôt etkhen niphêoui mareftoubo
Our Father who art in the heavens, may be hallowed
ⲛ̅ ϫⲉⲡⲉⲕⲣⲁⲛ. ⲙⲁⲣⲉⲥⲓ ⲛ̀ϫⲉⲧⲉⲕⲙⲉⲧⲟⲩⲣⲟ. ⲡⲉⲧⲉϩⲛⲁⲕ
entche pekran. Maresi entche tekmetouro. Peteḥnak
thy name. May come thy kingdom Thy will

ⲙⲁⲣⲉϥϣⲱⲡⲓ ⲙⲫⲣⲏϯ ϧⲉⲛ ⲧⲫⲉ ⲛⲉⲙ ϩⲓϫⲉⲛ
marefshôpi emphrêti khen tphe nem ḥitchen
let it be as in the heaven so upon
ⲡⲓⲕⲁϩⲓ. ⲡⲉⲛⲱⲓⲕ ⲛ̅ ⲧⲉ ⲣⲁⲥϯ ⲙⲏⲓϥ ⲛⲁⲛ
pikaḥi. Penôik ente rasti mêif nan
the earth. Our bread of to-morrow give it to us
ⲙ̅ ⲫⲟⲟⲩ. ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲭⲁ ⲛⲉⲧⲉⲣⲟⲛ ⲛⲁⲛ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ⲙ̅ ⲫⲣⲏϯ
emphoou. Ouoḥ kha neteron nan ebol emphrêti
to-day. And forgive our debts to us as
ϩⲱⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉⲛⲭⲱ ⲉⲃⲟⲗ ⲛ̅ ⲛⲏ ⲉⲧⲉⲟⲩⲟⲛ ⲛ̀ⲧⲁⲛ ⲉⲣⲱⲟⲩ.
ḥôn entenkhô ebol ennê eteouon entan erôou.
we also forgive those who are our debtors.
ⲟⲩⲟϩ ⲙ̅ ⲡⲉⲣⲉⲛⲧⲉⲛ ⲉϧⲟⲩⲛ ⲉ ⲡⲓⲣⲁⲥⲙⲟⲥ.* ⲁⲗⲗⲁ*
ouoḥ emperenten ekhoun e pirasmos, alla
And bring us not into temptation; but
ⲛⲁϩⲙⲉⲛ ⲉⲃⲟⲗϩⲁ ⲡⲓⲡⲉⲧϩⲱⲟⲩ.
naḥmen ebolḥa pipetḥôou.
deliver us from that which is evil.
Coptic inscription on a slice of limestone.
[No. 10, Table-case M, Third Egyptian Room.]
Decipherment of Egyptian Hieroglyphics.—Before the close of
the period of Roman rule in Egypt, the hieroglyphic system of writing
fell into disuse, and its place was gradually taken by demotic, i. e., a
conventional form of the hieratic, or cursive writing. When the
Egyptians became converted to Christianity, they adopted the Greek
alphabet, adding to it seven signs derived from demotic, to express
the sounds peculiar to their language. The priests appear to have

prosecuted some study of hieroglyphics until the end of the fifth
century.., but soon after this the power to read and understand
A D
them was lost, and until the beginning of the nineteenth century, no
Oriental or European could read or understand a hieroglyphic
inscription. During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries many
attempts were made by scholars to read and translate the Egyptian
inscriptions, but no real progress was made until after the discovery
of the Rosetta Stone. This “Stone” is a portion of a large black
basalt stele measuring 3 feet 9 inches by 2 feet 4½ inches, and is
inscribed with fourteen lines of hieroglyphics, thirty-two lines of
demotic, and fifty-four lines of Greek. (See Southern Egyptian
Gallery, No. 960.) It was found in 1798 by a French officer of artillery
named Boussard, among the ruins of Fort Saint Julien, near the
Rosetta mouth of the Nile, and was removed, in 1799, to the Institut
National at Cairo, to be examined by the learned; and Napoleon
ordered the inscription to be engraved and copies of it to be
submitted to the scholars and learned societies of Europe. In 1801 it
passed into the possession of the British, and it was sent to England
in February, 1802. It was exhibited for a few months in the rooms of
the Society of Antiquaries, and then was finally deposited in the
British Museum.

The “Rosetta Stone.”
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, No. 960.]
The first translation of the Greek text was made by Du Theil
and Weston, in 1801-02, and they rightly declared that the stone
was set up as the result of a Decree passed at the General Council
of Egyptian priests assembled at Memphis to celebrate the first
commemoration of the coronation of Ptolemy V, Epiphanes, king
of all Egypt. The young king had been crowned in the eighth year of
his reign, therefore the first commemoration took place in the ninth
year, in the spring of the year,.. 196. The Decree sets forth that,
B C
because the king had given corn and money from his private
resources to the temples, and had remitted taxes and released
prisoners, and had abolished the press-gang and restored the
worship of the gods, etc., the priests decreed that: Additional
honours be paid to the king and his ancestors; an image of the king
be set up in every temple; a statue and shrine be set up in every
temple; a monthly festival be established on the birthday and
coronation day of the king; this Decree be engraved upon a hard
stone stele in the writing of the priests (hieroglyphic), in the writing
of books (demotic), and in the writing of the Greeks (Greek), and set
up in every temple of the first, second, and third class, by the side of
the image of the king.
In 1802 Åkerblad succeeded in making out the general meaning
of several lines of the demotic text, and in identifying the equivalents
of the names Alexander, Alexandria, Ptolemy, etc. In 1819 Thomas
Young published in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, vol. IV, the results
of his studies of the texts, and among them was a list of several
alphabetic Egyptian characters to which, in most cases, he had
assigned correct values. He was the first to grasp the idea of a
phonetic principle in the reading of the Egyptian hieroglyphics,
and he was the first to apply it to their decipherment. Warburton, De
Guignes, Barthélemy and Zoëga all suspected the existence of
alphabetic hieroglyphics, and the three last-named scholars believed
that the oval, or cartouche 𓍷, contained a royal name; but it was

Young who first proved both points and successfully deciphered the
name of Ptolemy on the Rosetta Stone, and that of Berenice on
another monument, and it was Bankes who first identified the name
of Cleopatra. The list of alphabetic characters was much enlarged
in 1822 by the eminent scholar Champollion, who not only
correctly deciphered the names and titles of most of the Roman
Emperors, but drew up classified lists of the hieroglyphics, and
formulated a system of grammar and general decipherment which is
the foundation upon which all subsequent Egyptologists have
worked. The discovery of the correct alphabetic values of Egyptian
signs was most useful for reading names, but, for translating the
language, a competent knowledge of Coptic was required. Now
Coptic is only another name for Egyptian. The Egyptian Christians
are called “Copts,” and the Holy Scriptures, Liturgies, etc., which
they translated from Greek soon after their conversion to
Christianity, are said to be written in “Coptic.” The knowledge of
Coptic has never been lost, and a comparatively large sacred
literature has always been available for study by scholars.
Champollion, quite early in the nineteenth century, realized the great
importance of Coptic for the purpose of Egyptian decipherment, and
he made himself the greatest Coptic scholar of his time. His
knowledge of Coptic was deep and wide, and to this important
qualification much of his success is due. Having once obtained a
correct value of many alphabetic and syllabic characters, his
knowledge of Coptic helped him to deduce the values of others, and
to assign meanings to Egyptian words with marvellous accuracy.
The method by which the greater part of the Egyptian alphabet
was recovered is this: It was assumed correctly that the cartouche
always contained a royal name. The only cartouche on the Rosetta
Stone was assumed to contain the name Ptolemy. An obelisk
brought from Philae about that time contained a hieroglyphic
inscription, and a translation of it in Greek, which mentioned two
names, Ptolemy and Cleopatra, and one of the cartouches was filled
with hieroglyphic characters which were identical with those in the
cartouche on the Rosetta Stone. Thus there was good reason to

believe that the cartouche on the Rosetta Stone contained the name
of Ptolemy written in hieroglyphic characters. Here is the cartouche
which was assumed to represent the name Ptolemaios, or
Ptolemy, the hieroglyphics being numbered (A)—
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓍯𓃭(cid:0)𓐝𓇌𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
A
and here is the cartouche which was assumed to represent the name
Cleopatra (B)—
𓍹(cid:0)𓈎(cid:0)𓃭𓇋𓍯𓊪𓄿𓂧(cid:0)𓂋𓄿𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓍺
B
Now in B, the first sign, 𓈎, must represent K; it is not found in A.
No. 2 sign, 𓃭, is identical with No. 4 sign in A. This was assumed to
be L. No. 3 sign, 𓇋, represents a vowel, and doubled, 𓇌, is found in
A, No. 6. No. 4 sign, 𓍯, is identical with No. 3 in A, and it must have
the value of O in both A and B. No. 5 sign, 𓊪, is identical with No. 1
in A, and as A contains the name Ptolemy, the first sign, 𓊪, must be
P. No. 6 sign, 𓄿, is wanting in A, but its value must be A, because it
is the same sign as No. 9, which ends the name Kleopatra. No. 7, 𓂧,
does not occur in A, but we see it in other cartouches taking the
place of 𓏏 the second letter in the name of Ptolemaios, and it must
therefore be some kind of T. No. 8, 𓂋, we assume is R, because it
is the last letter but one in the name of Kleopatra. Nos. 10 and 11
signs,
𓏏(cid:0)𓆇,
we find after the names of goddesses; the first of them
is T; and the second is a “determinative.” We now insert the
alphabetic values in the two cartouches and obtain the following
results:
A
𓍹(cid:0)P(cid:0)TOL(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)
𓍹(cid:0)K(cid:0)L(?) OPATR(?)A𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓍺
B

In the case of A it is quite clear that P is the first part of the
TOL
name of Ptolemaios, therefore 𓐝𓇌𓋴 must represent the second part
of the name, or M. We may then say that 𓐝 is M, and the last
AIOS
sign 𓋴 is S, and that 𓇌 represents some i-sound, or e-sound; in the
case of B we are certain of the values of all the signs except 𓈎, 𓂋
and 𓆇, but it is clear from their positions in the name that the first
two must represent K and R. We have seen that the signs
𓏏(cid:0)𓆇
are
added to the names of goddesses, and as Kleopatra was regarded as
a goddess, they are added to her name. They do not affect the
name itself. The two royal names may now be taken out of the
cartouches, and the values written under the characters thus:
𓊪 𓏏 𓍯 𓃭 𓐝 𓇌 𓋴
A P T O L M (I or E) S
𓈎 𓃭 𓇋 𓍯 𓊪 𓄿 𓂧 𓂋 𓄿 𓏏(cid:0)𓆇
B K L E(?) O P A T R A...
Taking another cartouche
𓍹(cid:0)𓄿𓃭(cid:0)𓎡𓋴𓇋𓈖(cid:0)𓂧𓂋(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓍺
we
already know the signs, 𓄿𓃭𓋴𓇋𓂧𓂋, which represent A, L, S, E(?), T,
and R. The only Greek name which contains these letters in this
order is Alexandros, or Alexander, and we therefore conclude that
the last sign, 𓊃, is S, that 𓎡 is K, that 𓇋 is A, and that 𓈖 is N.
A common title of the Roman Emperors was 𓎡𓇌𓋴𓂋𓊃, and as we
know all the signs but one (𓇌) with certainty we write down K-𓇌-S-
R-S, which can only be “Kaisaros,” or “Caesar.” From this we again
see that 𓇌 represents the αι in Καισαρος and Πτολεμαιος, or ae in
Caesar.
In this way the Egyptian alphabet was recovered.
Now if we look at the last line of the Egyptian text on the Rosetta
Stone we shall find that in the cartouche
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓍯𓃭(cid:0)𓐝𓇌𓋴𓋹𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓌻𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
there are
several signs which have not been explained above, viz.,

𓋹𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓌻𓇌.
These signs, it is clear, form no part of
the name of Ptolemy, and the position in which they are found
suggests that they represent titles. A reference to the Greek version
(line 49) shows that Ptolemy is there called “everliving, beloved of
Phtha,” and it now remains to see if the hieroglyphics mean anything
like these words. The sound and meaning of the first sign, 𓋹, were
well known from the statements of Greek writers who said that it
was pronounced anch, and that it meant “living,” or “life.” Two of the
three characters in the group,
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛,
we know to be P and T, and
we are justified in assuming that
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛
represents the name of the
god Phtha, or as it is now read Ptaḥ. Now, if 𓋹 means “living” or
“life,” and
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛
means “Ptaḥ,”
𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)
must mean “for
ever,” and 𓌻𓇌 must mean “beloved.” Of the first group,
𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0), we already know the value of the second sign 𓏏,
T, and of the second group we know that 𓇌 has the value of I.
Recourse must now be had to Coptic, so that the Coptic (i. e.,
Egyptian) words for “for ever” and “beloved” may be compared with
the hieroglyphic originals. The common word for “for ever,”
“eternity,” etc., is eneḥ, but there is no n in
𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0), so this
will not suit. We do, however, find the word ϭⲉⲧ, djet, which means
“an age,” “a long undefined period of time,” and this agrees well with
the sound of 𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0), and shows that the sound of 𓆓 was
something like DJ, and that 𓇾 must have a T sound. The common
word in Coptic for “to love” is ⲙⲉⲣ, mer, and we may therefore
transcribe 𓌻𓇌 by meri, and assume that it means something like
“beloved.” As the meanings here deduced for
𓋹𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓌻𓇌
make good sense in every text in which they occur we are
justified in assuming them to be correct.
The Egyptian alphabetic characters are as follow:—

𓄿 A The Hebrew aleph א.
𓇋 Ȧ
𓂝 Ā Pronounced like the Hebrew ע.
𓇌 or 𓏭 I The Hebrew yodh י.
𓅱 or 𓏲 U or W The Hebrew וּ and ו. It had sometimes
an o-sound, like the Hebrew ֹ ו.
𓃀 B Hebrew ב.
𓊪 P ” פ.
𓆑 F
𓅓 ⎫
M ” מ.
𓐝 ⎭
𓈖 ⎫
N ” נ.
𓋔 ⎭
𓂋 ⎫
R and L ” ר and ל.
𓃭 ⎭
𓉔 H ” ה.
𓎛 Ḥ ” ח.
𓐍 χ (KH) ” כ, without the Dagesh.
𓊃 ⎫
S ” ס or שׂ.
𓋴 ⎭
𓈚 SH ” שׁ.
𓎡 K ” כּ.
𓈎 Q ” ק.
𓎼 Ḳ ” ג.
𓏏 T ” תּ.
𓍿 ⎫
TH(?) ” ת (?).
𓍘 ⎭
𓂧 Ṭ ” ט.

𓆓 TCH or Ṣ (?) ” צ.
Hieroglyphic writing.—The hieroglyph is a picture of an object,
animate or inanimate, e. g., 𓁹 an eye, 𓃝 a ram, 𓃹 a hare, 𓅐 a
vulture, 𓅧 a duck, 𓇼 a star, 𓉶 an obelisk, 𓁷 a face, 𓂾 a leg.
Now pictures may also represent ideas, e. g., 𓊊, a wall leaning on
one side represents “falling”; 𓄤, a musical instrument, symbolizes
“joy, happiness, pleasure,” etc.; 𓋩, a seal, represents something of
which great care is taken, i. e., “treasure”; 𓀋, a man holding a vessel
(cid:0)
placed on his head, symbolizes “to bear, to carry”;, the sky with
a star hanging from it, suggests “night”; and so on. Hieroglyphs
used in this way are called ideographs. Every object had a name,
therefore each picture, or hieroglyph, was a word-sign, and a list of
these would have made a dictionary in the earliest times. At one
time all hieroglyphs were syllabic, and the Egyptians had no
alphabetic hieroglyphs; and if scribes had needed to write down
letter by letter the name of some foreign product, or the name of a
foreign king, supposing they did not possess syllables suitable in
sound, they would have been unable to do so. In fact the Egyptians
needed an alphabet, and the oldest inscriptions of any length show
that they already possessed one.
About the origin of alphabetic hieroglyphs opinions differ. They
probably arose in this way. The sounds of the first letters of the
names of certain objects were given to the pictures of such objects,
and henceforward the pictures, or hieroglyphs, bore those phonetic
values, and so became the letters of an alphabet. Each name chosen
for this purpose appears to have consisted of a syllable containing
an initial consonant, and one or more vowels. The vowel, or vowels,
was dropped, and the name of the object, or the syllable, passed
into a purely alphabetic value. Thus 𓃀 is an alphabetic hieroglyph
with the phonetic value of, and it may well represent the
B
consonant of some word like Bu “a place,” or Bȧa “iron.” Similarly 𓂋,

which has the phonetic value of, probably represents the
R
consonant of some word like Ru “mouth,” in Coptic Rô; and 𓆑 with
the phonetic value of probably represents the consonant of some
F
word like fa “to carry.” Thus we have a series of alphabetic
characters or letters. Signs having alphabetic values are used to
form words without any reference to their pictorial or ideographic
meanings. One of the words for “knife” is sfnṭ, which is thus spelt
𓋴𓆑(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓂧. Now 𓋴 s is a picture of a chair-back; 𓆑 f is a picture of
a snail(?); 𓈖 n is a picture of the wavy surface of water; and 𓂧 ṭ is
a picture of a human hand stretched out flat; in the word sfnṭ the
picture meanings of the characters play no part, and the signs are
used to express alphabetic sounds only.
As long as the Egyptians used picture writing pure and simple its
meaning was easily understood, but, when they began to spell their
words with alphabetic signs and syllabic values of picture signs
which had no reference whatever to the original meaning of the
signs, it was found necessary to indicate in some way the meaning
and even the sounds of many of the words so written. This they did
by adding to them signs which are called determinatives. Thus the
word āḥa 𓊢𓂝 means both “to stand” and “boat,” but when the writer
wished the reader to give it the former meaning he added to the
word a pair of legs 𓂻, thus 𓊢𓂝(cid:0)𓂻, and when the latter he added
the picture of a boat 𓊛, thus 𓊢𓂝(cid:0)𓊛. Similarly men 𓏠(cid:0)𓈖 means
“to abide, be stable,” and also “to be ill,” and the meanings are
distinguished by the use of the determinatives 𓏛 and 𓅪, the former
signifying “an abstract idea,” and the latter “discomfort,” or “evil.”
The following words show the use of the determinatives; 𓀭 a god, 𓀁
actions performed with the mouth, 𓁐 a woman, 𓈉 a country, 𓄛 the
skin of an animal, 𓈗 water, 𓌪 actions performed with a knife, and 𓏊
a pot of unguent or liquid.
The god Khnemu 𓎸𓅓𓅱𓀭

Meṭu “to speak” 𓌃𓂧𓅱𓀁
Sat “daughter” 𓅭(cid:0)𓏏𓁐
Kesh “Nubia” 𓎡(cid:0)𓈚𓈉
Pennu “mouse” 𓊪(cid:0)𓈖𓏌𓅱𓄛
Mȧu “cat” 𓏇𓇋𓅱𓄛 or 𓏇𓇋𓅱𓃠
Qebḥ “libation” 𓈎𓃀𓎛𓈗
Sma “to slay” 𓋴𓌳𓌪
Merḥet “oil” 𓌻(cid:0)𓂋𓎛𓏏𓏊
Ḥeqt “beer” 𓎛𓈎(cid:0)𓏏𓏊
Hieroglyphs are written in perpendicular or horizontal lines as in A
and B. In these examples the words are to be read in the direction in
which the birds face, i. e., from left to right.
A.
𓇋𓂋𓃹𓈖𓈖𓎡𓅓𓊃𓏤(cid:0)𓀀
𓇋(cid:0)(cid:0)𓈎(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏛𓁹𓎡𓅭𓀀𓈖
𓋴𓌳𓄿𓅓𓆭(cid:0)𓏜𓊹[8]
B.
𓇋𓅱𓂋(cid:0)𓂞𓈖(cid:0)𓀀𓏏(cid:0)𓏐(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏥(cid:0)𓈖𓎛𓈎(cid:0)𓏏𓅪(cid:0)𓏥𓈗𓋔𓇋𓃀𓃚𓏭(cid:0)𓈗𓀁𓀀𓎛𓃀𓋴
𓅱𓋳𓏥(cid:0)𓈖𓇉𓄿(cid:0)𓏭𓅱𓋳𓀀𓅖𓄚(cid:0)𓈖𓊛𓃛(cid:0)𓏲(cid:0)𓏭𓊛𓀀[9]
The writing materials consisted of papyrus, palette, reed-pens,
ink and ink-pot. Papyrus was made from the stem of the papyrus
plant (Cyperus Papyrus), which grew in the marshes and pools near
the Nile; it is no longer cultivated in Egypt, but is found in the
Sûdân, where it grows to a height of from 20 to 25 ft., and has very
thick stems. The exact meaning and derivation of “papyrus” are
[10]
unknown, but the word is probably of Egyptian origin. A sheet of
papyrus was made in the following way: The stem was cut into thin
strips, which were laid side by side perpendicularly, and upon these

another series of strips was laid horizontally; a thin solution of gum,
or paste, was run in between them, after which the sheet was
pressed and dried. By joining a number of such sheets together rolls
of almost any length could be made. The longest papyrus in the
Egyptian Collection in the British Museum, No. 9999, is 135 ft. long
and 1 ft. 5 in. wide; the Papyrus of Ani measures 78 ft. by 1 ft. 3 in.;
the Papyrus of Nebseni, 76 ft. by 8¾ in.; the Papyrus of Nu, 65 ft. 6
in. by 1 ft. 1½ in.; the Papyrus of Nekht, 46 ft. 7 in. by 1 ft. 1½ in.
Wooden palette inscribed with the Wooden palette of Rāmeri, an
name of Ȧāḥmes I, B. C. 1600. official of Thothmes IV, B. C. 1470.
[No. 2, Table-case C, Third [No. 3, Table-case C, Third
Egyptian Room.] Egyptian Room.]
The palette, in Egyptian mesthȧ
𓐝(cid:0)𓊃𓍘𓇋𓆱,
usually consisted of
a rectangular piece of wood, from eight to sixteen inches long, and
from two to three broad, at one end of which were sunk a number
of oval or circular hollows to hold ink or paint. Down the middle was
cut a groove, sloping at one end, in which the writing reeds were
placed; these were kept in position by a piece of wood glued across
the middle of the palette, or by a sliding cover, which also served to
protect the reeds from injury. A very good collection of palettes is
exhibited in the Third Egyptian Room, Table-case C. Of special
interest are the palettes of Ba-nefer, of the reign of Pepi II,.. 3200
B C
(No. 12,782); the palette of Ȧāḥmes I, the first king of the XVIIIth
dynasty, about.. 1600 (No. 12,784); the palette of the scribe Pa-
B C
mer-ȧḥau, who lived in the reign of Ȧmen-ḥetep III, about.. 1450
B C
(No. 5513); and the palettes of Ȧmen-mes (No. 12,778) and a scribe
(No. 5514), who lived in the reign of Seti I and Rameses II
respectively. The hollows for the ink, or paint, generally black and
red, are usually two in number, but some palettes have a dozen. The
inscriptions on palettes usually contain prayers to the great gods of
the Other World for sepulchral offerings; but sometimes they are
dedications to the god Teḥuti, or Thoth
𓅝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓀭,
to whom the
invention of the art of writing is attributed. The writing reed, in

Egyptian qesh
𓈎(cid:0)𓈚𓌟𓆭,
which served as a pen, was about 10 inches
long, and from ⅟₁₆th to ⅛th of an inch in diameter; the end used
for writing was bruised and not cut. After the XXVIth dynasty, an
ordinary reed, similar to that used in the East at the present day,
was employed, and the end was cut like a quill, or steel pen. The
ordinary palette will hold about ten writing reeds easily. The ink was
made of mineral or vegetable substances mixed with gum and water.
The earths, or ochres, or preparations of copper, were rubbed down
on slabs with little mullers, several of which may be seen in the
Third Egyptian Room, Table-case C. The ink-pot was called pes
𓊪(cid:0)𓊃𓎺,
and was usually made of faïence or porcelain. The
hieroglyph 𓏟 represents the palette, an ink pot, and a reed, united
by a cord; the whole stands for “scribe” and “writing.”
Slab of limestone inscribed with a draft of a deed. Dated in the reign of Ḥeru-em-
ḥeb, about B. C. 1400.
[No. 22, Table-case C, Third Egyptian Room.]
Besides papyrus, scribes frequently used slices of white
limestone of a fine texture, or boards plastered with lime, for
writing purposes. On these they wrote drafts of literary
compositions, hymns, school exercises, and sketches in outline of
the figures of kings, gods, etc., made to scale. As examples may be
mentioned No. 22, inscribed with the draft of a legal document
which was drawn up in connection with a robbery of weapons from
the Royal Arsenal by the Chief of the Treasury, about.. 1100, and
B C
No. 41, inscribed in the hieratic character with a draft of a part of a
famous work called the “Instructions of Ȧmen-em-ḥāt I,” king of
Egypt, about.. 2500 (Third Egyptian Room, Table-case C). In the
B C
Ptolemaïc Period pieces of broken earthenware vessels, or
potsherds, commonly known as ostraka, were much used for
writing purposes. The inscriptions on these are chiefly of a business
character, receipts or acquittances, etc.; but certain of them contain
extracts from literary works, e. g., a school exercise consisting of
lines 105-117 and 128-139 of the Phoenissae of Euripides (No. 88,
Third Egyptian Room, Table-case C). After the introduction of

Christianity into Egypt, the Copts, or Christian Egyptians, imitated
their pagan ancestors, and wrote letters, lists of objects, prayers,
extracts from the Scriptures, etc., on slices of white limestone. A fine
collection of such Coptic inscriptions is exhibited in the Fourth
Egyptian Room, Table-case M; and of special interest are: No. 3.
Liturgical fragment. No. 5. An undertaking by Abraham to take
charge of a camel. No. 8. Religious exercise, Coptic and Greek
hymns. No. 17. Extract from Psalm xcviii, “Sing unto the Lord a new
Song,” etc. No. 19. Part of the Alexandrian Canon of the Mass,
written in corrupt Greek by Apa Eiḥannes. No. 20. Fragment
containing part of a Greek hymn and a letter in Coptic, conveying
the salutations of Dioskoros to his brother Ounaref and his mother
Tnouba. No. 26. Letter from the priest Victor and Matthaios, to
Germanos and Isak (Isaac), authorizing them to sow their share of a
field, and specifying the rent. No. 28. Document referring to the sale
of a camel. It is dated on the second of the month Pashans, and
[11]
witnessed by three persons:—Dioskle and Ouanafre of Pallas, and
Gergorios of Remmosh. No. 41. Part of a letter requesting some
monks to bless the writers, and to send holy water to them that they
might sprinkle their sick beasts with it. No. 53. List of measurements
of land, in which Greek arithmetical signs, etc., are employed. No.
57. Receipt for a ḥolokotinos (solidus) paid as tax or rent by Zaêl for
the “camels’ field” for the ninth year. No. 60. School exercise in
Greek and Coptic grammar; on the obverse is a portion of a letter
addressed to the authorities of a monastery. No. 61. Reading
exercise. No. 62. Fragment of a school exercise, with rough drawings
of animals. No. 65. Acquittance of Mizael Konstantinos for the first
instalment of taxes for the year, signed by Severus. No. 66. Writing
exercise for the formation of letters. The Copts sometimes covered
the outside of an unbroken jar with lists, etc., e. g., the amphora, No.
166, Fourth Egyptian Room, Wall-case No. 163. On this are written
F
six lists of names of men, with those of their fathers and mothers,
and it is probable that the inscriptions were written not later than
the eighth century.

CHAPTER III.
E L, S P.
GYPTIAN ITERATURE ACRED AND ROFANE
Egyptian Literature.—The literature of Ancient Egypt, written in
the hieroglyphic, hieratic, and demotic characters, is large, and the
contents of the principal divisions of it may be thus summarized:—
Religious literature: first and foremost is the great compilation
of texts, partly magical and partly religious, to which was given the
name “Per-em-hru,” i. e., the “Book of Coming Forth by Day,” or, as it
is now generally called, the Book of the Dead. This work is extant
in three great Recensions, viz., the Heliopolitan, Theban, and Saïte.
The Heliopolitan Recension consists of a series of formulas of a
semi-magical character, written in hieroglyphics, which were
collected by the priests of Ȧn, or Heliopolis, about.. 3300. A large
B C
number of these formulas were in existence long before this period.
The oldest copies of texts of this Recension are found in the
Pyramids of kings Unȧs, Tetȧ, Pepi I, Meḥti-em-sa-f, and Pepi II at
Ṣaḳḳârah, but series of the formulas from it were copied on coffins
and sarcophagi down to about.. 200. Among such is the coffin of
B C
Āmamu in the British Museum (First Egyptian Room, No. 6654). On
this magnificent coffin are written some hundreds of lines of text in
black ink, and a list of canonical offerings, according to the Liturgy of
Funerary Offerings, is appended. The coffin itself was intended to
represent the chamber of a maṣṭaba tomb, and on the inside are
painted pictures of doors and panels, similar to those which are
found in the tombs about.. 3500. It is one of the finest of its
B C
class, and it was probably made before the XIth dynasty (.. 2600).
B C
In connection with this must be mentioned the portion of a wooden
coffin of Menthuḥetep, a king of the XIth dynasty, on which is

inscribed a version of a part of the XVIIth Chapter of the Book of the
Dead (Second Egyptian Room, Wall-cases 86-88).
The Theban Recension was generally written upon papyri in
hieroglyphics, and was divided into sections, or chapters, each of
which had its distinct title, but no definite place in the series. It was
much used during the XVIIIth, XIXth, and XXth dynasties. In the first
half of the XVIIIth dynasty the custom grew up of adding vignettes
to certain chapters of this Recension, and before another century
had passed so many coloured illustrations were added to the papyri
that frequently chapters had to be abbreviated, and the scribes were
obliged to omit some of them altogether. This Recension contained
about 180 chapters, but no extant papyrus contains them all. The
chapters represent the theological opinions of the colleges of On
(Memphis), Herakleopolis, Abydos, and Thebes, and are of the first
importance for the study of the Egyptian Religion. In the Rubric to
the LXIVth Chapter are mentioned two traditions which are very
valuable for the history of the Recension. In the one it is stated that
the chapter was “found” in the reign of Semti, a king of the Ist
dynasty, and in the other that it was “found” in the reign of
Menkaurā (Mycerinus), a king of the IVth dynasty, by Ḥeru-ṭāṭā-f, a
prince, the son of King Khufu, or Cheops. Thus it is certain that in
the XVIIIth dynasty it was believed that the chapter was in existence
in the earliest dynasties. Now we find from the Papyrus of Nu that
there were two forms of this chapter extant, and that one of these
was twice as long as the other. The longer one is entitled “Chapter
of Coming Forth by Day,” and the shorter, “Chapter of Knowing the
‘Chapters of Coming Forth by Day’ in a Single Chapter.” The rubric to
the latter attributes the chapter to the Ist dynasty, and thus it seems
that even at this remote period the “Chapters of Coming Forth by
Day” were widely known, and that the priests found it necessary to
produce for general use a chapter which contained the essence of
them all.
The British Museum possesses the finest collection in the world of
papyri containing the Theban Recension, and of these may be

[12]
specially mentioned: The Papyrus of Nebseni, with vignettes in
black outline (No. 9900); the Papyrus of Ani, a magnificently
coloured papyrus containing texts and vignettes not found
[13]
elsewhere (No. 10,470); the Papyrus of Nu, with coloured
vignettes, rubrics, etc., containing a good text throughout, and a
[14]
large number of chapters not found elsewhere (No. 10,477); the
Papyrus of Hu-nefer, a scribe who flourished in the reign of Seti I,
[14]
with a fine series of brilliantly painted vignettes (No. 9901); and
the Papyrus of Mut-ḥetep, most valuable because it contains
correct copies of early texts (No. 10,010).
Vignette and text of the Theban Book of
the Dead from the Papyrus of Ani.
XVIIIth dynasty.
[Brit. Mus., No. 10,470.]
Vignette and text of the Theban Book of
the Dead from the Papyrus of Nu.
XVIIIth dynasty.
[Brit. Mus., No. 10,477.]
PLATE I.
Ḥer-Ḥeru, the first priest-king, and Queen Netchemet standing in the Hall of Osiris
and praying to the god whilst the heart of the Queen is being weighed in the
Balance.
XXIst dynasty, about B. C. 1050.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, No. 758.]
Presented by His Majesty the King, 1903.
Vignette and Chapter of the Book of
the Dead written in hieratic for Ḥeru-
em-ḥeb.
XXVIth dynasty, or later.
[Brit. Mus., No. 10,257.]

Out of the Theban Recension grew another Recension, to which
no special name has been given. It was written on papyrus both in
hieroglyphics and hieratic, and its Chapters have no fixed order. It
came into existence in the XXth dynasty, probably under the growing
influence of the priests of Ȧmen. Fine examples of the papyri of this
Recension are the Papyrus of Queen Netchemet (see Plate I),
the wife of Ḥer-Ḥeru, the first high priest-king of the XXIst dynasty
(exhibited in the Southern Egyptian Gallery), and the Papyrus of
[15]
Ȧnhai, a priestess of Ȧmen. In the latter an entirely new style of
decoration is employed, and gold is used in decorating the disk of Rā
Harmachis for the first time.
Of the history of the Book of the Dead between.. 1000 and 650
B C
little is known. Under the influence of the great renaissance, which
took place in the XXVIth dynasty, another Recension came into use,
called the Saïte. In this the chapters had a fixed order, many new
ones being inserted. The text was written both in hieroglyphics and
hieratic, and it was decorated with a series of vignettes, in which all
the figures were drawn in black outline. The appearance of papyri of
this Recension is monotonous and dull, and both the drawings and
the hieroglyphics are stiff and spiritless. Good examples of papyri of
this Recension are the Papyrus of Ḥeru-em-ḥeb, written in
hieratic (No. 10,257), and the Papyrus of Ḥeru, written in
hieroglyphics (No. 10,479). The vignettes usually occupy small
spaces at the top of the columns of text. The Recension in use in the
Ptolemaïc Period was the Saïte, but before the Roman Period it was
customary to write other and newer funerary works on papyri, and
little by little the Book of the Dead, as a whole, became obsolete. It
seems as if an attempt was made to extract from the old work the
texts which were regarded as absolutely necessary for salvation, and
as if the older mythology was unknown to the Egyptians of the
period. It is quite certain that many of the scribes copied texts
without understanding them, and that the meanings of many
vignettes were lost.

About the beginning of the Ptolemaïc Period the following works
came into general use: 1. The S S
HĀIT EN ENSEN
𓈚(cid:0)𓂝𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓍼𓈖𓊃(cid:0)𓈖𓊃(cid:0)𓈖𓊡𓏪,
or Book of Breathings.
Like the great Book of the Dead, this work was declared to have
been written by Thoth, the scribe of the gods, the “Heart of Rā.” It
contains a number of prayers for offerings, a series of declarations
that the deceased has not committed certain specified sins, a
statement that he has neither sin nor evil in him, and a demand that
his soul be admitted into the heaven because “he gave food to the
hungry, water to the thirsty, clothes to the naked, and offerings to
the Gods, and to the K (beatified spirits).” A fine copy of this work
HU
is that written in the hieratic character for Kerasher on a papyrus in
the British Museum (No. 9995). In the first part are copies of
vignettes from the Book of the Dead, but the details are modified to
suit the religious beliefs of the period. Thus Thoth and not Horus
introduces the deceased to Osiris, and Anubis and Hathor lead him
into the Judgment Hall instead of Maāt.
2. The Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys, a work in which
these goddesses lamented the sufferings and death of Osiris, and
proclaimed his resurrection, and glorified him in the heavens. It was
recited by two priestesses, who were ceremonially pure, on the 25th
day of the month Choiak (December), and the words in the book
were believed to be those which Isis and Nephthys actually said at
their first mourning for their brother Osiris. Copies of them were
written on papyrus and buried with the dead to ensure their
resurrection and future happiness and glory.
3. The Festival Songs of the Two Tcherti, i. e., of the Two
Weepers, Isis and Nephthys, a work similar in character to the
preceding. It was recited on five days of the month Choiak
(December), during which the great annual festival of Osiris was
celebrated. The priestesses who sang the verses of the work wore
lambs’-wool crowns on their heads, carried tambourines which they
beat from time to time, and bore on their arms bandlets with the
names of Isis and Nephthys written upon them. The recital of the

work was preceded by an address by the Kher ḥeb, or “Lector,” and
then the two priestesses sang the rhythmic sections of the
compositions alternately.
A copy of a Book of the Dead entitled “May my
name flourish!”
Roman Period.
[Brit. Mus., No. 10,304.]
4. The Litanies of Seker, a short composition of about 100 lines,
containing two series of addresses to Seker, the god of the Other
World. Fine copies of this and the preceding work are given in the
Rhind Papyrus (No. 10,188).
5. The Book of traversing Eternity (Shāti en sebebi ḥeḥ
𓏛(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓏤𓍼𓅂𓈖(cid:0)𓊃𓃀𓃀𓏭(cid:0)𓂻𓎛𓎛𓇳),
a work in which the happiness
of the blessed dead is described, and an account given of a journey
through the Other World by the deceased, who visits the shrines of
the gods, and takes part in the services of praise which are
performed there by the spirits and souls, of the righteous, and
enjoys the offerings which are made to them by the faithful on earth
(Papyrus No. 29, at Vienna).
[16]
6. The Book of May my Name Flourish, a work which was
very popular in the Roman Period. It is, in reality, a development of
a long prayer which is found in the Pyramid Texts of the VIth
dynasty. Its object was to make the name of the deceased
permanent in heaven and on earth, for it was a common belief, from
the earliest to the latest times, that the man whose name was
blotted out had no portion or existence in the other world. A
nameless soul possessed no identity, and could not be introduced to
Rā and the company of the gods. The British Museum possesses
several copies of this work, written generally on narrow strips of
papyrus, in a kind of hieratic, containing many demotic characters.
(Nos. 10,108, 10,111, 10,112, 10,109, etc.)

7. Another work which obtained some popularity in the late period
is the so-called Ritual of Embalmment. In this composition is
given a large number of the formulas that were recited over the
unguents, spices, and swathings during the process of embalming
the body.
The ceremonies of “Opening the Mouth.”
8. In all periods the burial of the dead was accompanied by the
presentation of series of offerings. Up to the end of the Vth dynasty
a comparatively small number of names of offerings was inscribed
on the walls of the tombs, and in the presentation of such offerings
consisted the ceremony of Opening the Mouth of the dead. Under
the VIth dynasty a new and enlarged list of offerings was drawn up,
and a series of formulas was added to it for recital by the priest as
object after object was presented to the mummy. In many of these
formulas there were plays of words upon the names of the offerings,
each of which was symbolical of some divine being, or object, or act.
Several new ceremonies connected with the purification and censing
of the mummy, and the use of instruments in “opening the mouth
and eyes” of the mummy were introduced at this time. To this List of
Offerings, with its rubrics, the name of Liturgy of Funerary
Offerings may be given. Under the XVIIIth dynasty a further
development of the List of Offerings took place, and new ceremonies
were added, and the work was henceforth known as the Book of
Opening the Mouth. The visitor will see on the west wall of the
Second Egyptian Room a large coloured drawing in which the
performance of ceremonies connected with the opening of the
mouth is represented. One priest is supposed to be touching the
mouth of the mummy with the Ur-ḥeka instrument, and is holding
other instruments; the other priest is presenting vases of water.
Behind them is the K, or Lector, who is pouring out water from
HER ḤEB
a libation vase and burning incense. The object of the Book of
Opening the Mouth was: 1. To give the deceased a new body in the
Other World, and to make him to be divine. 2. To establish
communion between the living and the dead. In later days a statue

of the deceased took the place of his mummy in the ceremonies,
and then the chief object of the ceremonies, formulas, and offerings,
was to provide a dwelling place for the Ka or “double” of the
deceased, and to make his soul to take up its abode in the statue.
The Book of Opening the Mouth was in general use from the Vth
dynasty to the first or second century of our era, that is, for a period
of 4,000 years, and copies of it made in the Roman Period are
almost identical with those found in the Pyramids of Ṣaḳḳârah of the
VIth dynasty.
9. An important section of the Religious Literature of Egypt is
formed by works which were intended to be used as Guides to the
Other World. The oldest of these is a work in which pictures are
given of portions of Restau, in the kingdom of the god Seker, and of
several parts of the Sekhet-ḥetep, or Elysian Fields, and their
positions in respect of the celestial Nile are shown. The descriptions
of these places and the formulas which were to be recited by the
deceased are written in hieratic, and these were to be learned by
men on earth so that their souls might recognize the various regions
as they came to them, and repeat the sacred words at the right
moments. This “Guide” may be called the Book of enabling a man
to travel over the ways of the Other World, but recent writers
have named it the Book of the Two Ways. The finest and fullest
copies of the work, with illustrations in full colour, are found in the
coffins of Ḳua-ṭep and Sen, or Senȧ, the “chief physician,” in the
British Museum (Nos. 30,841, 30,839).
A second work of this kind is the Book of what is in the Ṭuat,
or Other World, or Shāt ȧm Ṭuat,
𓏛(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓏏𓍼𓇋𓏶𓅓𓇼(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓉐.
In this
the Other World is divided into Twelve Sections corresponding to the
Twelve Hours of the Night, and pictures are given of the various
gods, demons, and fiends who were supposed to obstruct the way
of those who were passing from this world to the kingdoms of Osiris
and Rā. The texts contain the speeches of the Sun-god of night,
called Ȧfu-Rā, and describe the conditions of the beatified, or the
damned, in each section, and give the names of the principal gods.

The work is very lengthy, and complete copies of it must have been
cumbrous, as well as costly. The priests therefore prepared a
Summary of the Book of Ȧm-Ṭuat, which was supposed to
contain all that was absolutely essential for the soul to know that
had to travel from this world to the next. The most complete copy of
the larger work is given on the walls of the chambers in the tomb of
Seti I, at Thebes, but one half of it is cut on the outside of the
magnificent sarcophagus of Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt, king of Egypt about.. 378 (Southern Egyptian Gallery, No. 923). (See Plate II.) Of
B C
portions of the “Summary” there are several copies in the British
Museum, both with and without illustrations (Nos. 9975, 9979, 9981-
9985, etc.). The pictures of this work were believed to be endowed
with the same magical powers as the texts.
In the Book of Gates, a somewhat similar work, the road from
earth to heaven is marked by a series of Gates through which the
deceased hoped to pass. The texts, which are fully illustrated,
describe the progress of the Boat of the Sun-god to the Kingdom of
Osiris, the Judgment in the Hall of Osiris, the life of the beatified in
the Elysian Fields, and the punishment of the wicked and of the foes
of the Sun-god by dismemberment and burning. Following these
comes a set of magical texts and pictures which describe and
illustrate the ceremonies which were performed daily to make the
sun to rise. They show that the Egyptians used to make a model of
the sun, and place it in a boat, and then bring to it arrows to
represent rays, and disks to represent the hours; fire was next
kindled with the fire-stick and applied to the model, and appropriate
formulas having been recited, the body of the sun was believed to
be reconstituted.
PLATE II.
Scenes and texts from the Sixth Section of the Book of What is in the Other World.
From the sarcophagus of King Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt, B. C. 378.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 25, No. 923.]
10. As an example of Rituals may be mentioned the famous Daily
Ritual of the Divine Cult, the texts of which were inscribed upon

papyrus and cut on the walls of temples, e. g., Abydos. From this we
learn that the king was supposed to perform daily a series of
elaborate ceremonies in connection with the statue of Ȧmen, and to
present to it unguents, wine, incense, articles of sacred apparel, etc.
By means of these he entered into communion with the god, who
bestowed upon him his vital power, strength, and spiritual qualities.
11. Hymnology is well represented by the hymns to the gods
Rā, Rā-Harmachis, Temu and Osiris, which are found in the great
Papyrus of Ani in the British Museum (No. 10,470), and by the fine
Hymn to the Nile, of which two copies are preserved in the British
Museum (Sallier II, No. 10,182, and Anastasi VII, No. 10,222). Of
somewhat different character, though equally interesting, are the
Hymns to Ȧmen contained in the Anastasi Papyrus II (No. 10,243).
Under this head may be grouped the Litany of Osiris in the
Papyrus of Ani, and the Addresses of Horus to his father Osiris in
the Papyrus of Nebseni (No. 9900).
12. Service books are represented by the Book of
Overthrowing Āpepi, a work which contains a series of spells and
incantations that were recited in the great temple of Ȧmen-Rā at
Karnak (Thebes) on certain days of the month. These were directed
against Āpepi, the great foe of the Sun-god, and enemy of all
goodness and truth, who took the form of a monster serpent, and
waged war against all the gods daily. The rubrics contained
directions for ceremonies, in which wax-figures were burned in the
temple fires, whilst the priests recited the spells in the Book. There
is a complete copy of the work in the British Museum (No. 10,188),
which also contains a list of the accursed names of Āpepi, and the
text of the hymn of praise which was sung when the arch-fiend was
overthrown.
13. Exegesis is represented by two valuable copies of a work
which forms the XVIIth Chapter of the Book of the Dead in the
Papyrus of Ani (No. 10,470), and the Papyrus of Nebseni (No. 9900).
In it a text treating of the origin of the gods and their relation to Rā,
and of the doctrine of the union of Rā and Osiris, etc., is dissected,

and each sentence of the work is followed by a statement of the
opinions of the various great religious Colleges of Egypt.
14. An example of a rare class of work is found cut on a black
stone slab in the Southern Egyptian Gallery (No. 797). The text
states that it was copied from an inscribed board which had become
worm-eaten in the reign of Shabaka, king of Egypt, about.. 700.
B C
From what is legible on the slab we are justified in assuming that the
work contained a sort of philosophical statement of the religious
beliefs of a priest who was trying to systematize certain of the old
traditions of the country, and to evolve a system of belief which
should be consonant with the special traditions current at Memphis
at that time concerning the god Ptaḥ.
15. Another most important section of religious literature consists
of the funerary inscriptions cut on sepulchral tablets, or grave-
stones, which form so large a portion of the Egyptian collections of
the British Museum. In the vestibule and galleries is exhibited a
splendid series of such monuments, the oldest dating from the IVth
dynasty, about.. 3800, and the most recent from the first century
B C..; thus the series represents a period of about four thousand
A D
years. The value of these monuments is very great, for they not only
give the various forms of the prayer to the gods for sepulchral
offerings in the different periods of Egyptian history, but they afford
a great deal of information about the attributes of the gods, and
they illustrate the growth and decay of many forms of belief, details
of ritual, etc. On Plates III-VIII are reproduced good typical
examples of sepulchral tablets of the IVth, XIth, XIIth, XVIIIth,
XIXth, and XXXth dynasties.
The number of the religious works of the Egyptians was very
large, and in each great temple a small chamber was set apart as a
library; here the papyrus rolls, or books, were kept in boxes, and, in
some cases, the names of the works were inscribed on the walls of
the chamber. The number of the rolls in a temple library seems to
have been comparatively small, for the list of books which is cut on

the wall of the “House of Books,” of the temple of Edfû, only
contains the names of thirty-seven works.
Profane Literature.—Among works of a didactic and moral
character may be mentioned the Precepts of Kaqemna and the
Precepts of Ptaḥ-ḥetep. The first of these contains a short series
of admonitions as to general behaviour, which were written towards
the end of the IIIrd dynasty, about.. 3900, and the second a
B C
group of aphorisms of high moral worth, by a high official who
flourished in the reign of Ȧssȧ, a king of the Vth dynasty, about..
B C
3360. A late copy of the latter work is preserved in the British
Museum. Other works of this class are The Instructions of Ȧmen-
em-ḥāt I, a complete copy of which is given in the First Sallier
Papyrus (No. 10,185), and the Maxims of Ani, preserved in the
Egyptian Museum in Cairo. The latter work inculcates the highest
standard of practical morality, and contains a lofty idea of the duty of
the Egyptian to his god and his neighbour; many of the counsels
embody shrewd common sense and experience, and are similar to
portions of the Book of Proverbs and the Book of Ecclesiasticus. The
language in which the maxims are written is sometimes very
difficult, for many of them are in the form of short, pithy proverbs.
PLATE III.
False door from the tomb of Sheshȧ, a royal scribe, who flourished in the reign
of Khufu (Cheops), about B. C. 3700.
[Vestibule, North Wall, No. 18.]
PLATE IV.
Sepulchral tablet of Thethȧ, an official who flourished in the reign of Ȧntef-uaḥ-
ānkh, a king of the XIth dynasty, B. C. 2600.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 4, No. 100.]
PLATE V.
Painted sepulchral tablet of Sebek-ḥetep, scribe of the wine-cellar.
XVIIIth dynasty.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 12, No. 513.]
PLATE VI.

Sepulchral tablet of Pai-neḥsi, the overseer of the storehouse
of gold from the Sûdân.
XIIth dynasty.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 7, No. 299.]
PLATE VII.
Sepulchral tablet of Bak-en-Ȧmen, a scribe of the table and wine-
cellar.
XIXth or XXth dynasty.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 22, No. 751.]
PLATE VIII.
Sepulchral tablet of Nes-Ḥeru, a priest.
About B. C. 350.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 26, No. 941.]
A work of a somewhat similar character is the very interesting set
of “Instructions” given by a high official to his son Pepi, which we
know from the Second Sallier Papyrus and the Seventh Anastasi
Papyrus in the British Museum (Nos. 10,182, 10,222). The writer
entreats his son to adopt the profession of letters, which he points
out leads to rich emoluments, ease, comfort, and dignity, and he
begs him to “love letters as thy mother.” He then compares the toil
and unpleasantness of the life of the blacksmith, carpenter, stone-
cutter, barber, waterman, fisherman, farm-labourer, gardener, fish-
seller, sandal-maker, laundryman, etc., and urges him to devote
himself to his books. This work is commonly known as the Hymn in
Praise of Learning; it was very popular in schools under the XIXth
and following dynasties, and portions of it, written on slices of
limestone, were set as “copies” for school-boys.
The Egyptians greatly loved works of Fiction and Travel, and the
copies of such which have come down to us show that they were full
of marvellous incidents, and that they greatly resembled some of the
sections of the “Arabian Nights” of a later period. The Tale of the
Two Brothers, in the British Museum (No. 10,183), is one of the
best examples of Egyptian Fiction. In the first part of the story we

have a faithful description of the life of the peasant farmer in Egypt.
Ȧnpu, the elder brother, lives with his wife on a small farm, and
Batau, his younger brother, acts as his companion, steward, and
servant. The wife of Ȧnpu conceived great affection for Batau. One
day, when he returned to the farm on an errand, she told him of her
love; Batau rejected her overtures, left the house, and went about
his ordinary work in the fields. When Ȧnpu returned to his house in
the evening, he found the rooms in darkness, and, going inside, he
discovered his wife lying sick upon the floor and in a state which
suggested she had been ill-treated and beaten. In answer to his
questions she told him that Batau had attacked her and beaten her,
and that she was sure when he next came back to the farm he
would kill her; she did not tell him that she had made herself sick by
eating rancid grease, and Ȧnpu did not suspect her untruth. Ȧnpu
then took a large grass-cutting knife and went out to kill his brother
when he arrived. As Batau came to the byre to lead his cattle into
their stalls, the oxen told him that his brother was waiting behind
the door to kill him; looking under the door he saw Ȧnpu’s feet, and
then, setting his load on the ground, he fled from the barn as fast as
he could, pursued by his brother. Whilst they were running, the Sun-
god Shu looked on, and, seeing that Ȧnpu was gaining on Batau,
caused a river full of crocodiles to spring up between them, so that
Ȧnpu was on one bank and Batau was on the other. When Batau had
explained the truth of the matter to Ȧnpu, he departed to the Valley
of the Acacia, and the elder brother went home, murdered his wife,
and threw her body to the dogs.
The second part of the story is not so easy to follow. Batau went
to the Acacia Valley, and placed his heart on the top of the flower of
a tree, and passed some years in hunting the wild animals of the
desert. Whilst there the gods made for him a wife, who was,
however, subsequently carried off to be the queen of Egypt. By her
orders the tree on which was the heart of Batau was cut down, and
the heart fell to the ground, where, after some time, it was found by
Ȧnpu, who went in search of it. Batau having recovered his life, took
the form of a bull, and, after a series of marvellous transformations,

became the father of a king of Egypt. The papyrus containing this
story was written by the scribe Anna, and it was one of the rolls in
the library of Seti II Menephthah.
The Story of the Doomed Prince is another good example of
Egyptian Fiction, though the unique copy in the British Museum
(Harris, No. 500) is incomplete at the end. In the story of the
Possessed Princess of Bekhten we have a short but interesting
account of the driving out of a violent devil from the body of one of
the sisters-in-law of the king of Egypt, by means of a statue of the
god Khensu. The stele containing the text is in Paris. Travel is well
represented by the Adventures of Sa-Nehat (papyrus at Berlin);
the Story of a Shipwrecked Sailor, who was cast up on an
enchanted island, and conversed with a serpent of fabulous length
(papyrus at St. Petersburg); the Journey of Unu-Ȧmen, who went
to Bêrût to buy cedar wood for the Boat of Ȧmen-Rā at Thebes, but
was robbed on his way there, and shipwrecked on his way back,
being cast up on the Island of Cyprus (papyrus at St. Petersburg);
and the Travels of an Egyptian, in a papyrus in the British
Museum (No. 10,247). In the last work we have an account of the
journey of an official who travelled in Syria and Palestine, and of the
misfortunes which overtook him. He was robbed, his servants ran
away, the pole of his chariot was smashed, and he suffered from
heat by day, cold by night, and want of food and drink. For stealing
fruit from a garden near the road he was haled before the local
magistrate and fined heavily.
Stories of Magicians were as popular as books of travel, and of
these may be mentioned the group contained in the Westcar
Papyrus in Berlin. In one of them we are told of a famous magician
who made a figure of a crocodile in wax which, when thrown into
the river, became a huge, living crocodile, and devoured the man
who had done the magician an injury. In another the magician cut
off a goose’s head, and placed it in one part of the room, and the
body of the bird in another; he then recited certain words of power,
and the head and body approached each other little by little, and at
length the head sprang up on the neck, and the goose cackled. In

another story we are told how one of the maidens who was rowing
the royal barge on a lake dropped one of her ornaments into the
water. A magician having been brought, stood up and recited words
of power, whereupon the half of the lake on which was the boat
transferred itself above the other half, and remained there whilst the
maiden stepped out of the boat and picked up her ornament which
was seen lying on a shard. This done, the magician repeated words
of power, and the water, which had been standing up like a wall,
flowed back into its place.
Under the head of Science must be included the inscriptions
which deal with Astronomy, and contain lists of the Planets, the
thirty-six Dekans, the Signs of the Zodiac (see the coffin of Ḥeru-
netch-tef-f, First Egyptian Room, No. 6678), etc.; Calendars
(Papyrus No. 10,474); Geometry illustrated by the famous Rhind
Papyrus in the British Museum (No. 10,057); Geography and
Cartography, illustrated by the papyrus at Cairo in which the
religious divisions of the Fayyûm are described, and by the famous
map of the district of the gold mines preserved in the Museum of
Turin; Chronology, as represented by the Turin Papyrus, which,
when complete, contained the names of about 300 kings of Egypt,
and the lengths of their reigns in years and months, or days. In
connection with this branch may be mentioned the King List of
Thunurei, found at Ṣaḳḳârah, and the King Lists of Seti I and
Rameses II found at Abydos (Tablets of Abydos, 1 and 2); the
remains of the List made for Rameses II are preserved in the British
Museum (Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 6, No. 592).
Marble Sundial.
Ptolemaïc Period.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 29, No. 976.]
A number of valuable books dealing with Medicine have come
down to us, and of these one of the most interesting is the papyrus
in the British Museum, No. 10,059. It contains copies of a number of
prescriptions which date from the reign of Khufu, the builder of the

Great Pyramid, about.. 3730, and several of the time of Ȧmen-
B C
ḥetep III (.. 1450). The largest work on medicine is contained in
B C
the Ebers Papyrus at Leipzig, and there are medical papyri in the
Museums of Paris, Leyden, Berlin, and California (Hearst Medical
Papyrus). In all these we find that magic was considered to be as
efficacious as drugs; many of the prescriptions are to all intents and
purposes magical formulas, and several suggest charlatanism. Oil,
honey, and tinctures or decoctions of simple herbs were largely
used, and the long list of names of plants, herbs, seeds, etc., in the
Ebers Papyrus proves that, though the Egyptians had little idea of
scientific Botany, they had a very wide knowledge of the properties
of plants, etc. Anatomy was studied in a practical manner,
especially for the purposes of embalming and bone-setting, but as
no treatises on the subject have come down to us, it is impossible to
say whether the Egyptians deserved the great reputations which
they enjoyed as physicians. It is tolerably certain that they made no
experiments in dissection, for the body was sacred to Osiris, and
might not be dismembered, at all events in the later times. The
commonest diseases among the Egyptians seem to have been
ophthalmia, fever, maladies of the stomach, ulcers, “Nile boils,”
epilepsy and anaemia.
Biographical inscriptions form a very important section of the
Literature, and they throw much light, not only on the social
condition of the people, but also on the history of the country. Thus,
the inscription of the official Ptaḥ-shepses, who was born under
the IVth dynasty, besides enumerating the various high offices which
he held, proves that he lived through the reigns of eight or nine
kings, and thus fixes the order of the succession of several of them
(see Egyptian Vestibule, No. 32). The official Ȧntef lived under
three kings, whose names he gives, and thus fixes the order of their
[17]
succession (Bay 4, No. 99). (Plate XXII.) The stele of Erṭā-
Ȧntef-Ṭāṭāu says that the deceased was “Governor of the South” in
the reign of Usertsen I, and thus we know that an Egyptian viceroy
governed the Sûdân as early as.. 2433 (Bay 4, No. 196). The
B C
stele of Sa-Menthu describes how he went to the Sûdân to bring

back gold for the king of Egypt, and tells us that he made men,
women, and children to work in digging out the quartz, and in
crushing the ore and washing the gold from it (Bay 6, No. 145).
From the biographies of the great Egyptian officials much of the
history of Egypt can be pieced together.
The Egyptians did not write history in the modern sense of the
word. Some of the kings, e. g., Thothmes III, inscribed annals on
the walls of their temples, and many others set up inscriptions to
commemorate great events. Thus Usertsen III set up at Semnah in
the sixteenth year of his reign a stele to mark the frontier of Egypt
on the south, and to proclaim his conquest of the Northern Sûdân.
Ȧmen-ḥetep III,.. 1450, set up a stele at Semnah to record his
B C
conquest of the country of Abhat, and the slaughter of a number of
Blacks (Bay 6, No. 411). Rameses II caused copies of his account of
his fight against the Kheta, or Hittites, to be cut on stelae, and set
up in various places throughout the kingdom, e. g., at Amârah and
Abû-Simbel. Some of the Nubian kings also caused good detailed
accounts of their wars to be cut upon stelae, which were set up in
their capital, and in many cases these are the sole authorities for the
history of the period. Thus Piānkhi (.. 740) gives a really fine
B C
account of his invasion and conquest of Egypt, even taking the
trouble to describe the military operations connected with the siege
of great cities like Memphis, his love for horses, and his devotions at
Thebes and Heliopolis. Ḥeru-sa-ȧtef, another Nubian king, gives on
his stele a careful summary of his expeditions to various parts of the
Sûdân, and lists of the tribute which he received. Casts of both
monuments are exhibited in the Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 18,
No. 815, and Central Saloon, No. 793. The Stele of Nȧstasen (..
B C
525) at Berlin is another good example of this class of monument,
and the text, which seems to mention Cambyses, is of great interest.
Finally may be mentioned the stele of the Decree of Ptolemy I (..
B C
325), granting certain properties to the temple of Buto (see the Cast
in Bay 28, No. 950). The finest general account of the reign of a king
is that given by Rameses III (.. 1200) in the Harris Papyrus No. 1,
B C
in the British Museum (No. 9999); but even in this more care is

devoted to the glorification of the king than to the facts of history.
The inscription of Menephthah (.. 1250), which is cut on the back
B C
of a stele of Ȧmen-ḥetep III in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo,
though containing useful historical indications and mentioning the
name of the Israelites
𓇌𓊃(cid:0)𓏮(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓄿𓂋(cid:0)𓏤𓌙𓀀𓁐𓏪
(line 27), cannot be
regarded as a serious statement of fact, and must be classed with
the panegyric written by the court scribe Penta-urt on the exploits of
Rameses II.
The Historical Romances of the Egyptians are represented by
the narrative of the Capture of the town of Joppa (Harris
Papyrus, No. 500), and by the Dispute between Seqenen-Rā, King of
Thebes, and Āpepi, King of Avaris (Sallier Papyrus, I, No. 10,185).
Books of Magic are numerous, and of these may be mentioned
Papyrus Salt, No. 825, and Harris Papyrus, No. 10,051. Several
Mythological Legends are extant, viz., of the Resurrection of
Osiris and the birth of Horus (on a stele in Paris); of the Creation
of the World, Gods, and Men (British Museum Papyrus, No.
10,188); of the Wars of Ḥeru-Beḥuṭet, or Horus, the War-god of
Edfû (on the temple of Edfû); of the Destruction of Mankind (in
the tomb of Seti I); of how Unȧs killed and ate the Gods (in the
Pyramid of Unȧs); of the Poisoning of Rā the Sun-god (papyrus at
Turin); of the Death of Horus by a scorpion’s sting, and his
resurrection through Thoth (text on the Metternich Stele); and of the
Wanderings of Isis, with her son Horus and the Seven Scorpion-
goddesses, in the Delta (text on the Metternich Stele). The History
of Osiris, and of his murder by Set, has not yet been found in
Egyptian texts in a complete form, but there are frequent allusions
to this history in the inscriptions of all periods, and it is clear that we
have a tolerably accurate version of it in the narrative written by
Plutarch (De Iside et Osiride).
Among the Legal Documents in the British Museum may be
mentioned the papyri containing accounts of the prosecution of the
robbers who broke into and plundered the royal tombs under the
XXth dynasty (Papyri Abbott, Nos. 10,221 and 10,052), and the

process against a man who was charged with stealing a quantity of
silver (Nos. 10,053, 10,054). Songs and Poetry are represented by
the Love Songs contained in the Harris Papyrus, No. 500; the Song
of Ȧntuf, which was sung to the accompaniment of the harp (Harris
Papyrus, No. 500); and the Song of the Harper, written on the
wall of a tomb at Thebes, in which the hearers are enjoined to be
happy, to anoint and scent themselves, and to rejoice with music
and song, until the day cometh when they must depart to the land
“which loveth silence.” The mutability of things, and the fleetingness
of the world are also dwelt upon. The works enumerated in the
above paragraphs are written in hieroglyphics and hieratic. The
literature written in demotic is considerable, and it consists of
books of magic, tales and stories, collections of moral aphorisms,
legal documents, marriage contracts, etc.

CHAPTER IV.
M C. M. P. H M.
ANNERS AND USTOMS ARRIAGE OLYGAMY ONOUR PAID TO THE OTHER
T C N. T. E. D. F. A.
HE HILD AND ITS AME OYS DUCATION RESS OOD MUSEMENTS
D H F. A C B.
WELLING OUSES AND URNITURE GRICULTURE AND ATTLE REEDING
T. H.
RADE ANDICRAFTS
Manners and Customs.—The views of the Egyptians about
marriage closely resemble those held by many African tribes, for
they married their sisters and nieces, and sometimes indulged in
polygamy. It is probable that the views as to marriage which
obtained generally in Egypt were less rigid than those of Western
nations. According to an ancient legend Osiris married his sister Isis,
who became by him the mother of Horus, and he was also the father
of Anubis by his other sister Nephthys. Generally speaking, the
Egyptian was the husband of one wife, who was the mistress of his
house and the mother of his children, whether she was his sister, or
his niece, or a stranger. Kings and noblemen married several wives,
and became fathers of children by many of the women of their
households. The Ptolemies, curiously enough, seeing that they were
Greeks, married their sisters and nieces, like the Egyptians. Marriage
in Egypt was, no doubt, arranged in the way common to the East,
i. e., it was practically a business transaction, great care being taken
to provide for the maintenance of the woman in the event of
misbehaviour either on her part or that of her husband. Whether any
religious ceremony was performed at the marriage is unknown. Girls
were married before they were fourteen years of age. The legitimate
wife of a man is called “Nebt pa,”
𓎟(cid:0)𓏏𓉐(cid:0)𓏤,
i. e., “lady of the
[18]
house,” and she might of course, be “his beloved sister”;
frequently, however, the latter title is a euphemism for “mistress,” or
“concubine.” To divorce or eject the “lady of the house” was a very

difficult matter, and it was probably the fear of possible pecuniary
complications which caused the Egyptian in so many cases to marry
his sister or the woman whom he called by that name. Moreover, it
was thus easier to keep the property in the husband’s family.
The legal wife was one of the freest women in the world. She
went about the house, and outside it, at will, and, unlike the modern
Egyptian women, she wore no veil. If she pleased, she held
converse with men in the village or market, and she suffered from
none of the restrictions which are placed upon women in the East in
modern times. When the wife became a mother her power and
influence were greatly increased, and the literature of ancient Egypt
contains many passages which illustrate the honour and esteem in
which the “mistress of the house” was held by her children, and on
scores of stelae in the Egyptian Galleries the name of the mother of
the deceased is given, whilst that of his father is not mentioned. The
Egyptians, like many African tribes, traced their descent through
their mothers, and the views which they held concerning the
affection due to the wife from her husband, and the love which a
son should give to his mother, are well illustrated by two passages.
In the Precepts of Ptaḥ-ḥetep (.. 3200): “If thou wouldst be a
B C
wise man, rule thy house and love thy wife wholly and constantly.
Feed her and clothe her, love her tenderly, and fulfil her desires as
long as thou livest, for she is an estate which conferreth great
reward upon her lord. Be not hard to her, for she will be more easily
moved by persuasion than by force. Observe what she wisheth, and
that on which her mind runneth; thereby shalt thou make her to stay
in thy house. If thou resistest her will it is ruin.” In the Precepts of
Khensu-ḥetep (.. 1500) we read: “When thou art grown up, and
B C
art married, and hast a house, never forget the pains which thou
didst cost thy mother, nor the care which she bestowed upon thee.
Never give her cause to complain of thee, lest she lift up her hands
to God in heaven, and He hearken to her cry [and punish thee].”
The life of the woman in the lower classes was a hard one. She
cooked the food for her husband and children, she wove the flax into
linen, attended to all matters in the house, and usually managed to

have a large family. She was a mother at the age of fifteen, or
earlier, and a grandmother at thirty, by which time her body was
bent, her forehead wrinkled, and her face withered. Among the
upper classes the process of physical deterioration was, of course,
slower, but the results were the same.
Soon after a child was born a name was given to it, which usually
had reference to some physical characteristic; thus a boy might be
called “Nekht” 𓈖(cid:0)𓆱(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏏𓂡 “Strong,” and a girl “Nefert” 𓄤𓏏
“Beautiful,” or “Netchemet” 𓇛𓏏 “Sweet.” Pious folk introduced the
name of some god or goddess into the child’s name, e. g., “Rā-
ḥetep”
𓂋(cid:0)𓂝(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪𓀀
“Rā is satisfied,” and loyal folk the
name of the reigning king, e. g., “Pepi-nekht”
𓊪(cid:0)𓊪𓇌𓈖(cid:0)𓆱(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏏𓂡
“Pepi the strong one.” Several members of a
family often bore the same name, but in these cases each was
distinguished by some “little name” (i. e., pet-name). As a pet-name
may be mentioned “Mȧi-sherȧui,” i. e., “Little Cat,” or “Pussy,”
𓏇𓇌𓈚(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓏲(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓅪𓁐.
In well-to-do families a special day was set
apart for naming a child and this name-day was usually celebrated
with rejoicings.
For the first three years of its life a child was wholly in its mother’s
care, and she carried it about on her back or left shoulder (see the
ivory figure No. 41 in Table-case L in the Third Egyptian Room). For
the next three or four years of its life it went about naked, whether
boy or girl, gentle or simple; indeed a grandson of Khufu, the builder
of the Great Pyramid, went to school unclothed. The heads of
children were clean-shaven, with the exception of a lock of hair on
the right side of the head. Little girls sometimes wore an amulet on
their breast or body in order to avert the “evil eye,” and perhaps a
cheap bracelet or necklace. They played with dolls, numerous
examples of which have come down to us (see Standard-case C in
the Fourth Egyptian Room). Like all children, Egyptian children loved
toys of all kinds. As examples of these may be mentioned the cat
with a movable lower jaw, the elephant and his rider, each having

movable limbs, the negro being pursued by an animal, the ape
drawing a chariot, the cat-headed dwarf, the lion killing its prey,
the toy dog, hippopotamus, etc. The balls they played with were
made of porcelain, papyrus, leather stuffed with chopped straw, etc.
(See Standard-case C.)
Education.—It is doubtful if the children of peasants and of the
lowest classes went to school, or received any education at all; both
boys and girls were probably sent to herd the geese, to drive the
sheep and goats to pasture or to the canal or river to drink, to look
after the cows, to collect fuel for the fire, etc. It is unlikely that girls
or women generally were taught to read and to write, but little is
known about this matter. The boys of the professional and upper
classes undoubtedly received a certain amount of instruction, for
learning was highly esteemed throughout Egypt; but speaking
generally, the learning of the country was in the hands of the
scribes. The profession of the scribe was one of great dignity and
importance, and the highest offices in the land were open to him.
The temples and certain offices of the Government maintained
schools in which scribes were trained, and pupils were, of course,
promoted according to their proficiency and ability. In the temple-
schools boys were trained to copy religious texts both in the
hieroglyphic and hieratic characters, and they studied religious
literature, exegesis, the legends of the gods, funerary texts, etc. In
the schools of the Government Departments the teaching was
devised to suit the requirements of the Treasury, the Public
Granaries, the Crown Lands’ Department, etc., and the pupils studied
arithmetic, the keeping of accounts, geometry, mensuration, the
writing of reports, etc. In all schools boys were taught to be clean,
diligent, obedient, respectful and well-behaved. Lessons began early
in the morning and lasted till noon, when, as a papyrus in the British
Museum says: “the pupils left the school with cries of joy.” The daily
allowance of food for a boy was three bread-cakes and two jugs of
beer, which were brought to the school-house by his mother every
day. Corporal punishment was administered freely, and the back of
the lazy boy who would not get up early, and that of the inattentive

boy, received many stripes; in one case a very bad boy was locked
up for three whole months in a strong room in one of the temples.
School exercises were written on small whitewashed boards,
slices of white limestone, and papyrus with a reed, and they usually
consisted of extracts from ancient texts, religious or poetical, the
contents of which were intended to improve the mind and form the
morals and manners of the reader and copyist. (See Standard-case C
in the Third Egyptian Room.) The education given in the colleges of
the Priests was of a different character. There the young men
studied magical and religious texts, several Books of the Dead, the
doctrines of the cosmogony, and the histories and legends of the
gods. They read the ancient writings with the priests whose duty it
was to instruct them, and learned by heart their expositions of the
traditions accepted in the temples. One would expect the colleges to
have possessed glossaries, or dictionaries, and grammars, but it is
doubtful if they did, for nothing of the kind has hitherto been
discovered. History in the modern sense of the word was unknown,
though some of the great kings caused Annals of their reigns to be
written; and recent excavations have shown that even the King
Lists which were drawn up under the XVIIIth and XIXth dynasties
are incomplete, and that they contain the names of some kings
wrongly spelt. Astronomy was studied with some success by the
priests, and the maps of stars which were compiled by them were
undoubtedly used for practical purposes in connexion with the
agriculture of the country.
Head of a seated figure of a priestess wearing a
full-plaited wig, bandlet, etc.
XVIIIth dynasty.
[Wall-case 103, Third Egyptian Room.]
PLATE IX.
Painted relief with scenes representing dancing, the slaughter
of cattle, preparations for a feast, etc. From the tomb of Ur-ȧri-
en-Ptaḥ.
VIth dynasty.

[Assyrian Basement, No. 80.]
PLATE X.
Painted sepulchral tablet of Kaḥu, a scribe of a storehouse of Ȧmen.
XVIIIth dynasty.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 12, No. 514.]
Dress and ornaments.—The garments worn by the Egyptians
were made of linen, for wool was regarded as unclean. The earliest
masculine garment was the loin-cloth, the primitive form of which
was preserved for ceremonial purposes until a late period. Above it a
girdle, or belt, was usually added, and to this a tail, either that of
some animal, or an imitation made of leather, was fastened. The tail
is worn by many African peoples to this day. As time went on and
fashion changed the loin-cloth developed into a sort of skirt, which
varied in length, fulness, and folds, or a short kilt projecting in a
peak just above the knees. Later both men and women wore a sort
of shirt, and over this a loose flowing garment which reached from
the neck to the feet. The linen worn by women of the upper classes
was of very fine texture, and in the luxurious period of the XVIIIth
and XIXth dynasties their apparel was often very voluminous. The
dress of men and women under the VIth dynasty is well illustrated
by the scenes from a maṣṭaba tomb (see the Assyrian Saloon)
reproduced on Plate IX, and under the XVIIIth dynasty by the
figures on the stele of Kaḥu (Bay 12, No. 514) (Plate X). Both men
and women wore wigs, which were sometimes very full and heavy,
but women plaited their natural hair. Sandals were made of papyrus
and palm-fibre, neatly woven or plaited, and sometimes of goat skin,
or gazelle skin, well tanned and stained a pink colour. (See Table-
case A in the Third Egyptian Room and Standard-case L in the
Fourth Egyptian Room.) The “cone” was worn on the head by men
and women, sometimes with a lotus flower or lily attached to it.
According to some it contained a ball saturated with oil or pomade of
some kind, which ran slowly into the hair, and so spread over the
head and shoulders, causing pleasing sensations to him on whose
head the ball was. The headdresses of the king and queen were
very elaborate, whilst those of ordinary folk consisted of a bandlet,

more or less decorated. Men of position always carried a staff or
walking stick as a sign of authority, and those whom the king had
honoured by the gift of a gold collar wore it on every important
occasion. Both men and women wore rings, anklets, bracelets,
armlets, necklaces, elaborately ornamented collars, pectorals,
pendants, amulets, and earrings, just as they do in Egypt and the
Sûdân at the present time. Egyptian women stained the nails of their
fingers and toes a yellowish red with the juice of the ḥenna plant;
they painted their faces with a sort of rouge, and their eyelids and
eyebrows with a preparation of antimony (stibium, or koḥl), and
they added under the eyes thick lines of paint to make them appear
large and full. Both men and women sometimes decorated their
bodies with tattoo markings, which originally probably had a
religious, or tribal, import. The burning winds and heat made the
use of unguents an absolute necessity, and oils and pomades were
very largely used in all periods. Strong scented woods and herbs
were pounded and mixed with oil, and rubbed into the body, and
scents were in ancient days, as now, in great demand. Often
women carried a fan and a mirror. A fine collection of mirrors is
exhibited in Wall-cases Nos. 182-187 in the Fourth Egyptian Room.
Food.—The food of the lower classes consisted chiefly of bread
and vegetables. The bread was made of a kind of millet, like the
modern dhurra, barley, and rarely of wheat. The grains were
rolled and crushed on a stone and then both the flour and the bran
were mixed with water into a stiff paste; from this pieces were
broken off and flattened out by the hand into cakes of various
degrees of thickness, which were baked on hot stones, or in mud-
lined ovens. (See the examples in Table-case H in the Third Egyptian
Room.) Bread-cakes were made in a variety of shapes, e. g., 𓏏, 𓏙, 𓏐,
(cid:0), 𓊔, (cid:0), [glyph not in Unicode], 𓏖, 𓏑, etc. Among vegetables may
be mentioned onions, cucumbers of various kinds, beans, peas,
lentils, radishes, pumpkins, water-melons, leeks, garlic,
roots of the turnip and carrot class, and vegetables belonging to the
class of the modern bâmia, bâdingân (egg-plant), melûkhîyah
(spinach), etc. All these grew in great abundance, and, in growing,

needed little attention, and formed very important items in the food
of all classes. (Compare Numbers xi, 4, 5: “And the children of Israel
also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat? We
remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers,
and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlick.”)
Milk was drunk in large quantities by the living and was offered to
the dead, and cheese was everywhere a common article of food.
Among fruits may be mentioned figs, dates, mulberries, grapes,
and probably pomegranates. From both figs and dates syrups
and sweetmeats must have been made. Fish was largely eaten by
the poorer classes, but from various passages in the texts we learn
that the “eaters of fish” were unclean ceremonially. The animal
food eaten consisted of the flesh of the sheep, goat, ox, gazelle,
ariel, the antelope and other animals of that class, etc.; domestic
animals intended for human food were often fattened artificially.
Groups of swine are represented on the monuments occasionally,
but the pig must have been regarded as an unclean animal. Among
the birds eaten were the goose, duck, pigeon, dove, and the
several kinds of birds which were found in the marshes all over
Egypt in ancient days. Geese also were fattened artificially, and
the trade in them must have been very large. (See the wall painting
in Standard-case I in the Third Egyptian Room, where the inspection
and counting of geese are represented.) Salt was obtained from the
lakes on the sea-coast, and rock-salt from several places in the
Western Desert. With cooked meats, stews, etc., various kinds of
seeds of the spice class were probably eaten, as modern nations
eat mustard and pepper.
The common drink of the country was beer, ḥeqt
𓎛𓈎(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏊,
made from barley, and probably flavoured with plants of various
kinds which took the place of hops; in the earliest Liturgy of
Funerary Offerings mention is made of three or four kinds of beer. A
sweet beer was made from honey. Wine made from grapes was
drunk by the upper classes, and the lower classes drank date wine.
This was, and still is, made by pouring water on ripe, fleshy dates,
and letting it stand for a number of days, according to the strength

of the wine required; after standing for a week or so the liquor
becomes an exceedingly strong intoxicant.
Mode of eating.—The peasant sat, or squatted, on the ground
and dipped his bread-cake into the mess of lentils or boiled
vegetables which was in a bowl resting either on the ground or on a
poor wooden stand. Well-to-do folk either sat on low stools, or lay
on reed mats or cushions, and dipped their hands into the various
bowls of boiled grain, meat, and vegetables which were placed on
the small low stand that served as a table, round which they were
grouped. Water was drunk from earthenware vessels, which were
probably like the modern ḳula, or water-bottle, and wine and beer
from bowls. The joint was roughly cut or broken into small pieces,
probably before it was brought into the eating-chamber, but birds
were pulled to pieces by the head of the house and his family or
guests as they sat at meat. Fingers were wiped on the thin, flat
bread-cakes, but after the meal a member of the household brought
a jug and basin and poured water over the hands of those who had
eaten. The chief meal of the day was eaten about the time of
sunset. The Egyptians were careful to inculcate moderation in eating
and drinking. Kaqemna, the sage, said: “If thou art sitting in
company hate the food which thou likest; restrain thy appetite, for
greediness savoureth of the beasts. Since one cup of water will
quench the thirst, and a mouthful of vegetables stablish the heart,
and one kind of good food is as satisfying as another, and a small
quantity [of food] is as good as a large quantity, the man who
permitteth his appetite to guide him is an abomination.” On the
other hand, the guest must take what his host gives him, and must
eat it, for to leave it uneaten is indeed an unmannerly act. And Ptaḥ-
ḥetep said: “When thou art seated among the guests of a great
man, accept what he giveth thee gracefully. Look before thee, nor
stare [at the food], nor look at it often; he who departeth from this
rule is a boorish fellow. And speak not to the great man more than is
necessary, for one knoweth not what word will displease him. Speak
when he speaketh, and thy word shall give pleasure.”
Relief with a hippopotamus. From the temple of Neb-ḥap-Rā Menthu-ḥetep.

XIth dynasty.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 3, No. 110.]
Amusements.—The children of the poor were employed as soon
as possible in tending the animals in the field, and they had few toys
to play with; the children of well-to-do folk had painted wooden
dolls, with hair made of strings of mud or porcelain beads, and
movable joints, models of animals, etc. The chief amusement of men
was hunting, and fishing, and fowling. Fish and water-fowl were
usually caught in nets, but as bronze fish hooks have been found
(see Table-cases B and J in the Third Egyptian Room) the rod and
line must also have been used. The Egyptian sportsman set out on
the marshes in a shallow boat with low bows and stern, taking with
him his short fishing spears, harpoons, boomerangs (see Table-
case E in the Third Egyptian Room), nets, his hunting-cat (see the
wall-painting in Case I in the Third Egyptian Room), servants, and
sometimes a favourite wife or daughter. Nets were cast for fish in
certain parts of the marshes, and the boat was poled in among the
high reeds and bulrushes where the birds congregated. The skilled
boomerang thrower soon brought down many birds, and his efforts
were ably seconded by his hunting-cat. Among the birds may be
mentioned the vulture, eagle, hawk, falcon, buzzard, kite,
crow, lark, linnet, sparrow, quail, pelican, ibis, swallow,
heron, goose, pigeon, etc. Occasionally the hippopotamus was
attacked among the dense papyrus growths, and the animal was
usually harpooned to death, as was the custom in the Sûdân until
recently, for the sake of the flesh. The crocodile was also
sometimes caught. No hippopotamus has been seen living in Egypt
in a natural state for very many generations, and the crocodile
retreated south of Kharṭûm soon after paddle steamers were placed
on the Nile. The crocodile was considered to be a sacred animal for
thousands of years, and a sacred crocodile was kept and worshipped
as the God of the Nile at Kharṭûm so recently as the year 1829. The
numerous ivory objects found in Predynastic graves prove that the
primitive Egyptians hunted and killed the elephant (see Table-case
L in the Third Egyptian Room), and it seems as if a considerable

amount of ivory passed into Egypt proper by way of the First
Cataract, for the ancient Egyptian name of the old frontier city was
Ābu
𓍋𓃀𓅱𓃰𓅱𓄣(cid:0)𓈉,
i. e., “Elephant City” (hence “Elephantine”). At a
very early period, however, the elephant must have retreated far to
the south, for he plays no part in Egyptian mythology, and figures of
the animal are rare. (See the carnelian elephant in Table-case F, in
the Fourth Egyptian Room.) The bear also seems to have been
hunted. (See page 86.)
The deserts on each side of the Nile were hunted in all periods,
and if we may trust the paintings in the tombs excellent sport was
always to be had. The animals most commonly hunted were the
lion, lynx, leopard, panther, wolf, jackal, wild-dog, fox,
hyaena, hare, gazelle, oryx, ibex, ariel, and many other animals
of that class. In primitive times the Egyptians caught many animals
with the lasso (see the green slate shield exhibited in Table-case L
in the Third Egyptian Room). The rope was thrown over the horns,
or round the legs, of the animal, which was then easily pulled down.
The weapons used in hunting were clubs, bows, flint-tipped
arrows, boomerangs, and doubled-headed axes, all of which are
shown in the illustrations on page 23. The indigenous ancestors of
the dynastic Egyptians probably hunted the elephant, rhinoceros,
and giraffe, but it is unlikely that many of these creatures remained
in Egypt in the Historical Period. Dogs were employed largely in
hunting, and several species are known. The most useful and
valuable was the large dog, something like the greyhound, with prick
ears and a long curling tail, of the same species which is used in
Mesopotamia and Persia and the Sûdân at the present day, and is
called Salûḳî. The boldness of this kind of dog, called in Egyptian
thesem
𓍿(cid:0)𓊃𓅓𓃡,
is marvellous, for he will attack panthers and
lions, and his fleetness is almost incredible. His speed is compared
with that of a flash of light in the Book of the Dead (Chapter XXIV).
The kings of the XVIIIth dynasty were great hunters, and Ȧmen-
ḥetep III, who hunted from the Euphrates in the North to the Blue
Nile in the South, states on his scarabs that he killed with his own

hand 110 fierce lions during the first ten years of his reign. (See
Table-case D, Fourth Egyptian Room, Nos. 925-929.)
Green schist bear.
Archaïc Period.
[No. 10, Table-case L, Third Egyptian Room.]
Next to hunting dancing was perhaps the most favourite
amusement of the Egyptians, and from Pyramid times the Egyptians
delighted in watching men and women perform. The dances were
accompanied sometimes by youths who played a reed pipe or
flute, single or double, or twanged the strings of an instrument of
the harp, 𓏢, or lute class. (See the fine examples in Table-case A in
the Fourth Egyptian Room.) The kings of the Ancient Empire loved a
dance called the “dance of the god” which was danced by the
Pygmies in Central Africa; and two of them, Ȧssȧ and Pepi, caused
a Pygmy to be brought from his remote country to Memphis to
dance before them. Dancing women danced and sang to the
accompaniment of the tambourine, which was also used, together
with the sistrum 𓏣, cymbals, and bells, in musical services in the
temples. The drum, both the large drum which was beaten with
tabs of leather, and the small hand drum, was a very favourite
instrument of music, and was largely used in festivities by every
class. Tumblers, acrobats, and buffoons afforded amusement to
the spectators, and the drawings found on the walls of some of the
tombs at Beni Hasan (.. 2300) show that many of the tricks
B C
exhibited at the present day were performed at that time. The well-
to-do Egyptian hired dancers, singers, gymnasts, and musicians, and
entertained his guests, both during and after feasts, with their
performances.
The Egyptian loved to play draughts on earth, in Egyptian sent
𓊃(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓏠,
and he earnestly hoped that he would do the same in
heaven. (See Standard-case F in the Third Egyptian Room, where
the scribe Ani and his wife are represented playing draughts in the
Other World.) How the game was played is not known, but there

must have been several kinds of games, for the draughtboards are
not all arranged in the same way. (For examples of them see
Standard-cases C and H in the Fourth Egyptian Room.) The top of
the box which held the draughtsmen formed the board on which
the game was played. The Egyptians played a number of games with
counters, but the methods are unknown. Numbers of dice have
been found in the tombs, but it is doubtful if the die was known
among the Egyptians of the Early Empire. Many of their games were,
no doubt, games of chance. The modern equivalent of the draughts
and counters of the ancient Egyptians is dominoes. The poor man, it
seems from the texts, sometimes betook himself to “the house for
swilling beer”
𓋴𓅨(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓈗𓏊𓎛𓈎(cid:0)𓏏𓏊𓉐(cid:0)𓏤,
where he got drunk, and
babbled about his affairs, and fell about and hurt himself, and was
then cast out of the door by his fellow drinkers who said: “out with
this swiller,”
𓁷(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓅱𓈐𓅮𓄿𓏭𓋴𓅨(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓈗𓏊(cid:0)𓂡𓏪.
When his friends
came to seek him and upbraid him, they found him lying on the
ground as helpless as a child (Maxims of Khensu-ḥetep, XIII). During
the dark, moonless nights, after long weary days spent in hauling up
water from the river, the peasant villager had little to amuse him,
except games played with counters and draughts, and the converse
of his companions in the “beer-house.”
Egyptian house, with inner chamber and two flights of steps
leading to the roof.
About B. C. 4000.
[No. 292, Wall-case 107, Third Egyptian Room.]
Dwelling Houses.—The king usually lived in a palace or large
building within the precincts of some temple, or at a very little
distance from one. His palace was probably like the large houses of
modern times in Egypt, i. e., it had a courtyard with trees in the
middle of it, and a large garden round about it. In the garden were
fish-ponds and groves of fruit trees, palms, acacias, flowering shrubs
with scented blossoms, and a limited number of flowers. There were
arbours, too, covered with creepers and vines, and the gardeners
watered the ground daily by means of small channels into which

water was poured from the shâdûf, or the water wheel. The
courtyards were paved, or tiled, or covered with floors made of inlaid
painted porcelain work. The walls and ceilings of the rooms were
painted with rich and intricate designs, and in a few of the rooms
there were openings near the roof which served as windows. The
royal furniture was probably richly painted and inlaid with ebony,
ivory, porcelain, and, under the New Empire, metal vases of all
shapes and sizes would be seen everywhere in the dwelling rooms.
Certain large rooms were set apart for receptions and
entertainments, and these probably contained large raised benches
placed along the walls for the guests. The kitchen, pantry, stables,
and general servants’ quarters were outside the house, but the
personal attendants on the king and queen, the steward, the master
of the chambers, etc., had their apartments in the palace. The
storeys were rarely more than two in number, and the roof, which
was flat, was approached by a flight of steps, either from the
courtyard or from the roof of the storey on the ground floor.
The houses of nobles were built on the same lines as the
palace, but with less magnificence, and they seldom consisted of
more than two storeys. There was a courtyard, with sets of small
rooms built on three sides of it, and a portico on the fourth. On the
flat roof were wind shafts by which the north wind was brought into
the rooms, and a small amount of light was also admitted into them
through openings in the upper parts of the walls, close to the ceiling.
Then as now, at certain seasons of the year, some of the members
of the family slept on the roof or in the courtyard, the remainder on
the upper floor. Near the house were the wine-press, beer-house,
stable, byres for cattle, bins for various kinds of grain, etc., and
chambers for storing the fruit and vegetables from the estate. The
garden contained a small lake, and in the ground round about,
which was divided into oblong beds, were fruit trees and flowering
shrubs with scented blossoms, vines, etc. The whole was enclosed
within a thick mud wall built probably of crude brick. The
farmhouse of one storey usually contained one living-room, one
bed-room, and a number of small chambers in which grain was

stored. On the roof was a small chamber to which the master retired
in the cool of the evening; this was approached by means of a flight
of solid mud steps. The corn was ground and the bread baked in the
courtyard, where also were kept the large porous earthenware jars,
like the modern zîr, containing the supply of water which was
brought to the house from the Nile each morning and evening. The
house and yard were enclosed by a strong mud wall, with one door
in it; in times of danger the cattle of the farm were driven from the
fields into the yard. A good model of this kind of house is exhibited
in Standard-case C, in the Fourth Egyptian Room. Here are seen the
master sitting in the chamber on the wall, or roof, with a plate of
food before him, and the wife rolling the dough for the bread-cakes
of the evening meal. The house of the peasant labourer was a
mere hut made of mud, the roof of which was formed of layers of
palm branches or straw. Small huts were made of reeds or palm
trees bound together with twigs, and perhaps daubed with mud in
the cold weather, and in the northern districts of mud; in the
summer a shelter of reed mats probably sufficed.
Egyptian hut.
About B. C. 4000.
[No. 293, Wall-case 108, Third Egyptian Room.]
Furniture.—The Egyptians did not fill their houses with furniture
like Western Nations. Their bedsteads were made of wood, which
usually came from the Sûdân, and consisted of a strong rectangular
framework, about 15 or 20 inches high, across which was stretched
plaited palm fibre, or rope; the ankarîb of the Sûdân is the modern
equivalent. The covering of such beds was formed of thick padded
linen sheets, and the pillow was a support made of wood, or ivory,
more or less ornamented, with a curved top for the neck to fit into.
(See Wall-cases Nos. 97, 98, in the Third Egyptian Room.) Carpets
were unknown, but plaited palm leaf or straw mats took their place.
Chairs (see Standard-case H in the Fourth Egyptian Room) and
tables were found in the houses of the wealthy, but only low stools
were known in poor abodes. (For examples of a painted table, chairs

inlaid with ivory and ebony, a couch-frame, stools, inlaid box, etc.,
see Standard-case L in the Fourth Egyptian Room.) Men, women,
and children squatted or sat on the floor, or reclined upon mats, and
in later days upon cushions made of padded linen. In houses of
moderate size there was probably a raised mud bench, covered with
mats in the receiving or eating room, for the use of the male
members of the house, or their guests. There was also, probably, a
raised mud bench built against the outside of one of the walls of the
house for the use of friends who sat there in the cool of the evening
and for the men of the house to sleep on during hot nights. Niches,
or square cavities cut in the walls, served as cupboards, and in one
of these the lamp (see Wall-case No. 176 in the Fourth Egyptian
Room), usually made of earthenware, stood.
Ivory head-rest, or pillow, of Ḳua-
ṭep.
XIIth dynasty.
[No. 69, Wall-case 98, Third
Egyptian Room.]
The stores of clothing, etc., were kept in a very small room
provided with a stout wooden door with a bolt-lock and key of
simple pattern. (For examples of bolts and keys, see Wall-cases Nos.
180, 181, in the Fourth Egyptian Room.) The mistress of the house
usually possessed a small strong box in which she kept jewellery,
ornaments, and amulets, and perhaps also her toilet requisites; in
some cases the latter were kept in a special toilet box, which held
eye-paint (stibium, or antimony, koḥl), comb, hair-tweezers,
pumice-stone, unguents and pomades, both scented and plain.
(See Standard-case L in the Fourth Egyptian Room.) Kitchen
utensils were comparatively few in number. Fresh and sour milk (or
curds), soft cheese, sheep-fat, etc., were kept in earthenware pots,
some of which were undoubtedly glazed; bowls made of
earthenware or gourds were common, as were large open saucers.
The cooking pots were usually of earthenware, or, among well-to-
do people, of metal. Knives made of flint, stone, or metal, were

common, and rough flesh forks; in the later period spoons were
used. Plates, in the modern sense of the word, were unknown; the
thick bread-cake served as a plate for those who squatted round the
bowl of cooked vegetables with pieces of meat on the top, and the
thin flat cake was frequently used as a napkin. A stone corn-
grinder and a kneading-stone were found in every house. The
stock of grain for the family was kept in large earthenware jars, or in
a kind of bin made of mud. Every house contained a figure of the
god under whose protection the family lived, and to this adoration
was offered at regular intervals; it took part in the family-councils, its
lot was bound up with that of the family, and it prevented wandering
spirits of evil disposition from entering the house. There being no
chimney to the house, the fire was lit wherever it was most
convenient, and the smoke went out through the roof and the
aperture in the wall which served as a window. The fuel was animal
dung, and such refuse from the straw as could not be eaten by the
cow or goat of the house, and, occasionally, pieces of wood. As
matches were unknown, care was taken to keep a small amount of
fuel smouldering under the ashes, so that whenever it was
necessary to boil lentils, etc., the fire could be revived; if the fire was
out, recourse was had to the striking of flints, or to some
neighbour, or to the temple fire. In primitive times the Egyptians
seem to have used a fire-stick, like some of the tribes of Central
Africa.
Agriculture and Cattle-breeding.—By far the larger part of the
population of Egypt and the Egyptian Sûdân has been for many
thousands of years past connected with the cultivation of the soil
and the rearing of cattle, and on the success of the farmer and the
cattle-breeder the prosperity of the whole country has always
depended. In remote ages, before the estuary of the Nile was filled
up by the mud which came down in flood-time from the mountains
of Ethiopia and Nubia, and while still the sea flowed up the Nile as
far as Esna, the primitive Egyptians were shepherds and herdsmen.
The great cattle-breeding district was situated in the neighbourhood
of the country now called Dâr Fûr, or the “Home of the Fûrs,” and

even to the present day the exportation of the beautiful cattle of the
district forms a very important item of Sûdân trade. The natives who
lived by breeding cattle were called by the Egyptians “Menti,” i. e.,
“cattle-men,” and their modern descendants are called “Baḳḳârah,”
which also means “cattle-men.” In all times they have been a wild
and lawless folk, ferocious, blood-thirsty, and cruel. The early cattle-
men worshipped the bull, and this animal played a prominent part
in later Egyptian mythology. Several kinds of bulls were worshipped
in Egypt: Apis at Memphis, Mnevis at Heliopolis, and Bachis at
Hermonthis, and one of the greatest of the titles of Osiris was “Bull
of Ȧmentet,” or “Bull of the Other World.” The cow also was
worshipped under the name of Hathor, and a flint cow-head in the
British Museum (Table-case M in the Third Egyptian Room) proves
that her cult dates from the latter part of the Neolithic Period. The
paintings on the walls of early tombs show that several kinds of
cattle were known to the Egyptians, and the inscriptions make it
clear that the old feudal lords and gentry of Egypt devoted much
attention to cattle-breeding, and that they made a regular trade of
it. (See the models of cows in the Wall-cases on the Landing of the
North-West Staircase, No. 140, and the wall painting in Standard-
case I in the Third Egyptian Room.) Oxen and cows were fattened
like the smaller animals and geese, and, before they were turned out
for the season into the deserts to browse upon the growth which
followed the rains, they were branded, or marked in some way with
their owner’s name.
The bull Ḥāp (Apis), with the triangular blaze on his
forehead, and the scarabs, etc., on his back.
[Table-case H, Third Egyptian Room.]
The bull Mer-ur (Mnevis).
[Table-case H, Third Egyptian Room.]
Flint Cow’s head.
[No. 86, Table-case M,
Third Egyptian Room.]

The camel was certainly known in the Predynastic Period, for the
head of an earthenware figure of one was found at Abydos a few
years ago; but this animal cannot have been used for transport
purposes, or bred by the early Dynastic Egyptians, for otherwise we
should find pictures of him on the walls of the tombs. One of the
earliest mentions of the camel is contained in the “Travels of an
Egyptian” (Brit. Mus. Papyrus No. 10,247), where we find the
Semitic word for camel under the form kamāȧl
𓎡𓄿𓅖𓇋(cid:0)𓄿𓏭(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏤𓄛.
The camel plays no part in Egyptian
mythology. The commonest beast of burden was the ass, which was
bred in large numbers, and was employed like oxen for treading out
the corn and for riding. One of the desert caravans of Ḥer-Khuf, an
old feudal lord of Elephantine under the VIth dynasty, contained 300
asses. The ass was admired for his strength, endurance, and virility,
and he appears in Egyptian mythology as a form of the Sun-god.
Sheep and goats were always bred in large numbers. The horse
may have been known in Egypt in the XIIth dynasty, but he was not
bred there until the experience gained by the Egyptians in their
Asiatic campaigns showed them his value in military operations.
Horses must have been plentiful in Egypt under the XXIInd dynasty,
“for Solomon had horses brought out of Egypt,” and “a chariot came
up and went out of Egypt, for six hundred shekels of silver, and an
horse for an hundred and fifty” (1 Kings x, 28, 29). Excellent
representations of horses are seen in the wall-painting in Standard-
case D in the Third Egyptian Room, and in the battle-scene of
Rameses II on the South Wall of the Fourth Egyptian Room, above
the cases.
The pig is not often represented on the monuments, but a
painting in a tomb at Thebes shows that swine were used on farms
for treading out the corn. From a very early period the god of evil,
Set, was believed to have appeared in the form of a “black pig”
𓂋(cid:0)𓂋𓃟𓆎𓅓𓏜
when he smote the Eye of Horus (i. e., the Sun). The
gods then decreed that pigs should be sacrificed to Horus, with
bulls, sheep, and goats. In one form of the Judgment Scene the pig
is the emblem of evil, and also in the Book of the Dead (see

Chapters XXXVI and CXII). On the other hand, the sow was an
animal sacred to Isis, and small figures of sows were worn as
amulets attached to necklaces. (See the figures of sacred animals in
Wall-case No. 121 in the Third Egyptian Room.) Under the early
dynasties a species of ram, which became the symbol of the god
Khnemu 𓁠, with flat horns projecting at right angles from the sides
of his head 𓃝, was common in Nubia, but it appears to have died
(cid:0)
out before the end of the XIIth dynasty. Another kind of ram
apparently indigenous to Nubia, became the symbol of the god
Ȧmen of the Sûdân.
The principal instrument used in farming was the plough 𓍁, the
share of which was made of a piece of wood tied to a long pole; at
the other end of the pole was fixed a bar, which was made fast to
the horns of the cows which drew the plough. This primitive
instrument was little more than a stout stake tied to a pole which
was drawn over the ground, and made a very shallow furrow. The
stiff Nile mud was further broken up by the hoe 𓌸, of which
examples may be seen in the Wall-case No. 102 in the Third
Egyptian Room (No. 281, etc.). As soon as the fields were ready to
receive the seed, the sowing took place, and when the seed had
been cast into the furrows it was trodden in by the animals on the
farm being driven over it. The sowing was done by hand, and no drill
appears to have been used. The fields were watered either by
allowing the water to flow from a large basin or reservoir on to
them, or by machines which lifted the water from the canal to their
level, or from the Nile itself. The commonest water-raising machine
resembled the modern shâdûf, which was worked by one or two
men. Two stout stakes were driven firmly into the ground at the
edge of the stream, and between them was tied a long pole, heavily
weighted with a mass of mud or stone at one end. To the end of the
longer half of the pole a rope and a leather bucket were tied. The
labourer drew the pole down until the bucket entered the stream,
and the weight of the counterpoise at the other end helped him to

raise the water to the surface of the field, where he poured it into
the channel leading to the growing crop.
At the harvest the crops were cut with the small sickle 𓌳 (see
Table-case K in Third Egyptian Room, Nos. 1-4), which in primitive
times was made of flint or a series of flints set in a wooden frame
[glyph not in Unicode], and in later times of iron or bronze. The
wheat or barley was tied up into small bundles by the reapers, and
carried to the threshing floor, where the grain was trodden out by
animals—donkeys, swine, etc. The threshing floor, as we may see
from the wall paintings and pictures on papyri, was circular in form,
(cid:0)
and its edges were raised,, thus preventing the animals, as they
ran round and round in it, from scattering the grain with their feet.
The operations of ploughing, reaping, and treading out the corn
are well illustrated by the Vignette No. 35, from the Ani Papyrus.
(See Standard-case G in the Third Egyptian Room.) When the grain
had been trodden out, it was thrown up by hand into heaps, the
wind blowing away the chaff whilst it was in the air. It was next
carried in baskets, or bags, to the store or granary, which was
usually near the house. Here it was either piled up in heaps on mud
stands with raised edges 𓊚, or poured into large bins built in the
walls along a rectangular courtyard. (See the models of granaries in
Standard-case C in the Fourth Egyptian Room.)
Trade.—The trade of Egypt appears to have been chiefly in the
hands of the seafaring folk of the Delta, who probably worked the
imports and exports of the country in connection with the Semitic
merchants who traded in the seaports of Phoenicia and the
Mediterranean generally. The chief export of Egypt was corn,
which was carried all over the Mediterranean, and we know from
Genesis xii, xli-xliii, that when grain was scarce in other countries,
the merchants were in the habit of going to Egypt to supply their
wants. At intervals, however, serious famines came upon Egypt
(Genesis xli, 55, 56), and when corn could not be imported, the
mortality among the people was very great. In the reign of Ptolemy
III (.. 247) there was a famine in Egypt, and the King expended
B C

much gold in purchasing grain at a high price to save the lives of the
people of Egypt, and he caused corn to be brought to Egypt from
Eastern Syria, and Phoenicia, and Cyprus. Next in importance came
the linen of Egypt, which, in the form of byssus, was famous
throughout Western Asia. Under the XVIIIth dynasty considerable
quantities of gold were exported from Egypt to Northern Syria,
Assyria and Babylonia. The gold came from the Eastern Sûdân and
Punt, where at that time (.. 1500) it was produced in such large
B C
quantities that Tushratta writing to Ȧmen-ḥetep III says: “Send me
so much gold that it cannot be measured, more gold than that thou
didst send to my father; for in my brother’s land (i. e., Egypt), gold is
as common as dust”! (Tell al-Amarna tablet, No. 8.) According to
Diodorus (ed. Didot, p. 41) Rameses II received from his gold and
silver mines in one year metal to the value of 32,000,000 minas, or
£80,000,000 sterling. Another article of export was paper
manufactured from papyrus.
Among the imports may be mentioned copper and tin from
Cyprus and Northern Syria, cedar wood from the Lebanon
Mountains, lapis-lazuli paste from Babylonia, myrrh and spices
for embalming, skins, cattle, ebony, ostrich feathers, bows,
pillows, chairs, couches, fans, mats, shields, etc., from the
Sûdân; and a number of the products of India and Arabia must have
found their way into Egypt by means of the caravans which crossed
the desert to some place near the modern Suez or Ḳanṭarah, and
some sea-borne goods entered Egypt by the route from the Red Sea
to the Nile, viâ Ḳuṣêr and Ḳena. The importance of Egypt as a
trading centre, and as the natural market half-way between the East
and the West, was not fully recognized until the Ptolemaïc Period,
about.. 250. Business was carried on chiefly by barter, so much
B C
wheat, barley, or millet being the value of a sheep, bull, cow, or
goat, linen, etc. The Egyptians used weights and measures, e. g.,
the royal cubit of 7 palms or 28 fingers, the little cubit of 6 palms
or 24 fingers, the palm of 4 fingers, the hand of 5 fingers, the fist
of 6 fingers, and the finger; of dry measure, the hen, the ṭenȧt,
the ȧpt, etc.; of weight, the ṭeben (= 3⅕ ounces), the ḳeṭ =

⅟₁₀th of a ṭeben, etc. The use of the scales was well known, but
there is no evidence that the steelyard was employed before the
Roman Period. Stamped money was unknown among the
Egyptians, but they appear to have used a currency which
consisted of pieces of wire made of copper, iron, or gold, and gold-
dust. Ring-money, made of gold, is represented in the painting on
the south wall of the Fourth Egyptian Room; and also the little bags
containing gold dust. Ring-money in gold is in use at the present day
along the east coast of Africa, and in certain parts of the Sûdân
copper wire still possesses great purchasing powers.

Jewellers drilling and polishing beads, etc.
XVIIIth dynasty.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 12, No. 518.]
Handicrafts.—The Egyptian of all periods was a skilled potter.
In the earliest times the potter’s wheel was unknown, and every
vessel was shaped by the potter’s hand or foot. Vessels of all sorts,
shapes, and sizes were made with great skill, and in later periods
were decorated with linear and other designs. The art of the potter
throve until the advent of the conquerors from Asia, when it began
to languish; and in a few centuries earthenware vessels were
superseded by stone. Good examples of Predynastic and Archaïc
pottery will be found in the cases on the Landing of the North-West
Staircase, and of the pottery of the later periods in the Fourth
Egyptian Room. The Basket-weaver wove rush matting, plaited
mats and sandals, and made ropes and baskets of all kinds.
Specimens of his work will be seen in Table-case A in the Third
Egyptian Room, and in Wall-cases 182-187 in the Fourth Egyptian
Room. Owing to the abundance of flax in Egypt the trade of the
linen-weaver was in all periods most flourishing, and the “fine
linen of Egypt” was famous throughout Western Asia and the
seaports of the Mediterranean. A staff of linen weavers appears to
have been attached to each temple, and the sale of their work
produced a large revenue; a portion was paid to the king, and the
rest was kept by the priests. The city of Ȧpu (Panopolis, the modern
Akhmîm) was one of the chief seats of the linen industry, and to this
day the dyed curtains of Akhmîm are used throughout Egypt. The
craft of the jeweller was very important, for, in addition to the
rings, bracelets, necklaces, pendants, earrings, etc., which he made
in gold and silver, he cut the amulets and ornaments in amethyst,
garnet, agate, onyx, chalcedony, carnelian, jasper, mother-of-
emerald, lapis-lazuli, turquoise, rock-crystal, basalt, porphyry,
haematite, obsidian, coral, mother-of-pearl, etc. (See Table-cases F,
J.) The finest work of the jeweller belongs to the XIIth dynasty, and
the workmen of that period brought the art of inlaying precious
stones and metals to a very high pitch of perfection. Some think

that the Egyptians understood the art of enamelling, but
authorities are not agreed on this point.
The glass-maker’s craft is a very old one in Egypt, and it is
probable that the Phoenicians borrowed it from that country. Fine
specimens of it in the British Museum are the turquoise-blue opaque
glass jar of Thothmes III (Table-case H, No. 50, Third Egyptian
Room), a blue glass bowl, and a variegated glass bowl from the
tomb of Ȧmen-ḥetep II (Nos. 57, 59, in the same case), and an
opaque glass stibium pot with a gold rim (Wall-cases 182-187, No.
29). The porcelain maker produced the little figures, amulets,
bowls, vases, ushabtiu-figures, tiles, beads, pendants, etc., in the
beautiful blue, green, purple, violet, and brown glazed ware to which
the name Egyptian porcelain is usually given. An exceedingly fine
collection of objects in this material is exhibited in Wall-cases Nos.
151-156 in the Fourth Egyptian Room. The leather worker
prepared parchments for writing materials, and made the harness
for horses and trappings for chariots, soldiers’ belts (Table-case B,
No. 193), sheaths for daggers (No. 37), nets of fine meshes (Wall-
case No. 187, Fourth Egyptian Room), seats for chairs (No. 5
Standard-case L, same room), bags in which barbers carried their
razors, etc. (Wall-case No. 184, Fourth Egyptian Room.) Examples of
the tools of the carpenter, blacksmith and coppersmith,
stonemason, house-painter and decorator, etc., will be found in
Table-case K and Wall-case 103 in the Third Egyptian Room.
Of the brickmaker’s work specimens belonging to the reigns of
Ȧmen-ḥetep III, Thothmes I, Thothmes III, and Rameses II are
exhibited in Wall-case 175, Fourth Egyptian Room. Examples of the
craft of the furniture maker in the form of tables, chairs, stools,
couches, toilet boxes, altar-stands, etc., are seen in Standard-case L
and Wall-case No. 190 in the Fourth Egyptian Room. The work of the
ivory carver went hand in hand with that of the carpenter as
regards the inlaying of chair frames, jewel-boxes, etc. (see Nos. 13
and 16 in Standard-case L). Specimens of the highest form of his
skill are seen in the chair-legs, human figures, spoons, etc., in Table-
case A in the Fourth Egyptian Room. The caster-in-metal

produced the splendid series of figures of the gods in Wall-cases
119-132 and Table-case H in the Third Egyptian Room; fine
examples are the silver figure of Ȧmen-Rā (No. 42), gold
figures of Thoth, Ptaḥ and Rā, (Nos. 21, 25, 26), and the gold
figure of Osiris (No. 34). The wood-carver made the models of
men, boats, animals, etc., which were placed in the tombs (see Wall-
case Nos. 192, 193, Fourth Egyptian Room), and dolls and
children’s toys (see Standard-case C, Fourth Egyptian Room). The
dyer produced the salmon-coloured linen coverings for mummies
(see Case L, First Egyptian Room), the brown mummy-swathings
(see Wall-cases 93-96, Third Egyptian Room), and coloured wearing
apparel (see Table-case E, Third Egyptian Room), etc.
The baker and confectioner found constant employment in
every town and village in Egypt, for the Egyptians loved cakes made
with honey, and fruit of all kinds, and bread and buns made into
fanciful shapes. A great business was done in bread and pastry
which were intended to serve as funerary offerings. Specimens of
the bread and the stands on which the flat loaves were placed, will
be found in Table-case H, Third Egyptian Room. The terra-cotta
cones 𓏙 which are exhibited in large numbers in Wall-cases 110,
111, are supposed by some to represent the loaves, of a pyramidal
shape, seen in the hands of kings and others who are represented
offering to the gods. The barber also found constant employment,
for many had their whole heads and bodies shaved every two or
three days. He also dressed the hair of ladies on ceremonial
occasions, and made wigs (see the fine example in Wall-case H,
Third Egyptian Room). The barber often united to his trade the
profession of physician, just as was the case in Europe in the
Middle Ages. The craft of the boat-builder was very important in a
country where a river was the chief highway. Flat-bottomed boats
and punts used in fishing in the canals, or fowling on the marshes,
were made of bundles of reeds, or papyrus, tied together, like the
modern tôf in the Sûdân. Boats for carrying merchandize on the river
were made of planks of wood pegged together, which were
sometimes kept in position by being nailed on to ribs, and others

were merely tied round with ropes made of papyrus. One of the
earliest known pictures of an Egyptian boat is seen on vase No. 160,
in Wall-case No. 5, on the landing of the North-West Staircase.
Models of funeral boats, and barges and war boats are exhibited on
the upper shelf of Wall-cases Nos. 99-110, in the Third Egyptian
Room. The Egyptians were skilful boat builders, and they made rafts
capable of carrying enormous blocks of stone, e. g., the obelisks
which Queen Ḥātshepset set up at Karnak. They had equivalents of
the modern broad ferry-boat, barge, lighter, etc., which they worked
with oars or “sweeps” and sails, or towed, when going upstream,
and when there was no wind.

CHAPTER V.
A, P, S,.
RCHITECTURE AINTING CULPTURE ETC
Architecture.—The history of the earliest form of Egyptian
architecture cannot be written because, with the exception of the
ruined tombs of the Archaïc Period, all the remains of the earliest
temples have been destroyed or have perished. The oldest form of
the house was, no doubt, a hut built of reeds, the roof of which was
supported by a pole, i. e., a tree trunk, or poles; its shape was round
or oblong. The cold winds of winter prompted the Egyptian to make
the walls of his abode of Nile mud; this he mixed with water until it
acquired the consistence of stiff paste, and then piled it up with his
hands until the walls were as thick and high as he wanted them to
be. All the walls inclined inwards, and so each helped to support the
other; the roof was made of a layer of mud which rested on a
number of pieces of palm trunks or small trees. The door probably
faced the south, and an aperture, which served as a window, was
cut high up in the north wall. (See the model of an early house, No.
174, North-West Staircase Landing.) Before the house was a small
yard enclosed by thick walls made of mud, which inclined inwards,
and a flight of solid mud steps led up to the roof. (See the models
of early houses in Wall-cases Nos. 105-108 in the Third Egyptian
Room.) Walls made of mud in this way are unsatisfactory, for they
sag or bulge, and soon fall down. The invention of the brick marked
a great improvement in the stability of buildings; and its use in the
construction of houses, granaries, government buildings, forts, etc.,
became universal. A theory has been recently put forward that
brickmaking was introduced into Egypt from Mesopotamia, but there
is no reason why, in a land where all the soil is mud, which when
well sun-dried becomes exceedingly hard, the idea of making bricks
should not have been indigenous. Few things in the East last as long

as a well-made brick, especially if it has been carefully baked; and
buildings, even when made of crude bricks, last for several hundreds
of years, unless they are destroyed by the hand of man. The
invention of the brick permitted the Egyptians to build the elliptical
arch, which is frequently found in brick-built buildings; the
knowledge of the arch is of ancient standing in Egypt. The early mud
or brick house of the man of means was provided with a portico
(the modern rakûbah), which was supported on palm trunks; this
portico suggested the colonnade of later days, and the palm trunks
the stone pillars with palm-leaf capitals.
Pylon and court of the Temple of Edfû.
Ptolemaïc Period.
The “house of the god,” or temple, was at first built of mud, but
what such a building was like is not known. Under the Ancient
Empire the Egyptians built their temples of stone, and the oldest
known example is that called the “Temple of the Sphinx” at Gîzah. It
is built on a simple plan, and consists practically of a large hall, in
(cid:0)
the form, containing 16 pillars, each about 16 feet high; the
materials used were granite and limestone. It had neither formal
door, nor windows, and such light as entered must have made its
way in through oblique slits in the roof. It has no inscriptions, or bas-
reliefs, or paintings, and even in its present state its massiveness,
dignity, and solidity greatly impress the beholder.
Gateway in the Temple of Rameses III, at Madînat Habû, in
Western Thebes.
About B. C. 1200.
Of the temples of the XIIth dynasty nothing is known, but of the
New Empire several temples exist, and their general characteristics
may be thus summarized. A broad path brought the worshipper to
the gateway in the wall which enclosed the temple precincts; on
each side of the path was a row of sphinxes, or rams, which
symbolized the guardian spirits of the place. Passing through the
gateway he soon reached the main pylon, which consisted of a
massive doorway and two towers. During festivals long painted

poles, flying coloured streamers, were attached to the face of the
pylon at regular intervals. On each side of the gateway was a
colossal statue of the king, and statues of the king were often
arranged at intervals along the front of the pylon. Before the pylon
stood a pair of obelisks, and sometimes a pair of sphinxes, or
sacred animals. The original signification of the obelisks is unknown;
it is probable that they were connected with a solar, or even phallic
cult, but as the texts afford no explanation of their meaning it is
useless to theorize. Beyond the great pylon was an open court,
with a colonnade, which was used as a sort of bazaar where holy
objects, amulets, and things for offerings could be bought by the
public. Here, too, the sick were laid that alms might be given to
them, and here beggars of all kinds congregated, as they do in a
modern mosque. Passing through a second pylon, the hypostyle
hall, or hall of columns, was entered, and here the priests made
their processions, and received the offerings of the faithful. Beyond
the hall, or halls of columns, the laity were not permitted to
penetrate. The other chambers of the temple formed the sanctuary
of the god, and contained his shrine. The little rooms round about
the shrine contained the temple library, and the dresses, jewellery,
and other sacred properties of the god, or gods, worshipped in the
temple. At the extreme end of the temple was the shrine of the god,
which was entered by no one except the king and the priests; in it
were kept a sacred boat, or ark, and a figure, or symbol, of the god,
or animal sacred to him.
Gateway of Ptolemy IX at Karnak.
PLATE XI.
Columns in the Temple of Seti I, B. C. 1370, at Abydos.
Granite obelisks at Karnak. That on the right bears the
name of Queen Ḥātshepset, and that on the left the name
of Thothmes I.
XVIIIth dynasty, B. C. 1550.
Pillars with ornamental capitals in the Temple of Isis at
Philae.
Ptolemaïc Period.

The temples of Egypt from the XVIIIth dynasty to the Roman
Period vary greatly in detail, but the general plan is always the same.
The great temples of Karnak (see Plate XXX), Luxor, Abydos (see
Plate XI), etc., awe the spectator by their size and majestic dignity;
the smaller temples of the Ptolemaïc and Roman Periods are less
grand, but are much more graceful buildings. The severity of the
interiors of the older buildings is moderated by the reliefs and
inscriptions with which walls, pillars, pilasters, architraves, etc., are
covered profusely, and the bright colours, reds, blues, greens, and
yellows, in which many of the painted scenes were executed, added
greatly to their general effect. The massive square pillars were
replaced in later times by pillars with eight sides, and the whole
character of the simple round column was changed when its shaft
was made to resemble a papyrus or lotus stalk, and its upper part
was sculptured in the form of the flower of either plant. Both pillars
and pilasters were sometimes decorated with figures of Osiris, cut
on the front face in high relief, as at Abû-Simbel, and the capitals
were often sculptured in the form of the head of Hathor (the Cow-
goddess), surmounted by a sistrum. The pillar with the Hathor-
headed capital was suggested by the pole, or small tree trunk,
surmounted by the head of a bull, ox, or cow, which the primitive
Egyptians set up over the graves of their chiefs, a custom which
survives to the present day among certain of the tribes of Central
Africa. Every temple had a sacred lake within its precincts, just as
every large house possessed a garden with an ornamental lake in it.
Each temple also was surrounded by a girdle wall, which was
usually made exceedingly strong and was provided with fortified
gateways. The space between the temple buildings and this wall was
occupied by gardens and storehouses for the property of the priests,
and also by the dwellings of private folk. Thus the girdle wall of the
temple actually enclosed a small city, which in cases of popular panic
or invasion became a city of refuge.
Painted portrait statue of Ȧn-kheft-ka,
a royal kinsman.
IVth dynasty, about B. C. 3700.

[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 1, No.
33.]
Painting and sculpture.—The Egyptians, from the IVth dynasty
downwards, were in the habit of painting the bas-reliefs in their
temples and tombs, and also their statues, and they seemed to have
relied greatly upon paintings in bright colours to enhance the effect
of the work of the sculptor. The earliest wall decoration consists of
series of figures of men, animals, etc., traced or cut in outline, or
sculptured in low relief, on tolerably smooth slabs of limestone;
sometimes the surfaces of the slabs were prepared with a sort of
limewash, and the paintings painted upon it. The skill of the painter,
even in the remote period of the IVth dynasty, is marvellous, and the
accuracy with which he represented every detail and characteristic of
animate and inanimate objects is beyond praise. At all periods,
however, general scenes are more or less hard, a fact due to want of
perspective. The Egyptians loved colour, and they used it wherever it
could possibly be employed. A striking instance of this is afforded by
the elaborately painted papyri of the Book of the Dead, which when
once buried in the tomb were intended to be seen by no other eye
than that of the spirit of the deceased!
Alabaster figure of a priest seated on a throne Head of a
with steps. painted statue of
Neb-ḥap-Rā
IVth-VIth dynasty.
Men-thu-ḥetep.
[No. 156, Wall-case 99, Third Egyptian Room.]
XIth dynasty.
[Northern
Egyptian Gallery,
Bay 3, No. 104.]
Diorite statue of Sebek-nekht.
XIIth dynasty.
[No. 164, Wall-case 100, Third Egyptian Room.]
The wall sculptures were of two kinds, the bas-relief and the
sunk relief. In the bas-relief the sculpture is raised a little above
the surface of the slab, and in the sunk relief it is a little below. The

sunk relief is one of the most characteristic features of Egyptian
sculpture. Of the first kind there are many examples in the Egyptian
Galleries of the British Museum, especially in the Vestibule at the
north end of the Northern Gallery, where the slab from the tomb of
Rā-ḥetep at Mêdûm (Egyptian Vestibule, No. 40), of the IVth dynasty
may be specially noted. Several portions of fine and delicately
painted bas-reliefs from the temple of Neb-ḥap-Rā; Menthu-ḥetep,
of the XIth dynasty, at Dêr al-Baḥarî, which are exhibited in Bay 2 of
the Northern Gallery, are worthy of careful study. The sepulchral
tablet of Sebek-āa, of the XIth dynasty, should be noted (Bay 4, No.
120; see Plate XXIII). Examples of the sunk relief will be found in
the Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 1. Both paintings and reliefs,
however, are unsatisfactory from the modern point of view, for while
the head is given in profile, the eye is represented as if the figure
were in a full-faced position. A front view is given of the shoulders,
but the view of the other portions of the body is a mixture of profile
and full face. These facts are calculated to give a false impression of
the skill of the painter and sculptor, which, as is admitted on all
hands, was very great.
Figure of a king.
XIIIth dynasty.
[No. 178, Wall-case 102, Third Egyptian Room.]
The artist was at a very early period fettered by tradition and
conventionality, but sufficient proofs have survived to show that
when free to give rein to his fancy he could produce even
caricatures and comic pictures of the most amusing character.
Thus, in Papyrus No. 10,016, we see the lion and the unicorn playing
a game of draughts, a fox playing a double pipe while animals of the
gazelle class strut in front of him, a cat driving geese, and a cat
presenting a palm branch to a mouse which is seated on a chair and
holding a lotus. Behind the chair is another mouse bearing a fan and
a bag with toilet requisites (see pages 27-30). In the reign of Ȧmen-
ḥetep IV, about.. 1420, there was a revolt against the
B C
conventional forms of painting and sculpture approved by the

priests. For about twenty-five years, new designs and new colours
were introduced, but they did not find favour among the people
generally, and, when the king died, traditionalism promptly re-
asserted itself, and the new capital which he founded near the
modern village of Tell al-Amarna fell into ruin, and its splendours
were forgotten.
Queen Tetȧ-Kharṭ, about B. C. 1600.
[No. 187, Wall-case 102, Third Egyptian Room.]
The sculptured reliefs of the IVth and Vth dynasties, and the
statues and portrait figures were in beauty and fidelity rarely
equalled in later times, and certainly never surpassed. The chief
employers of both painter and sculptor in the later dynasties were
the priests, who required statues of gods and kings for the temples;
massive strength, an expression of impassibility, and close
adherence to existing models were the traditional characteristics of
such works. With private employers the case was different, for they
demanded of the sculptor portrait figures which should be
representations of their friends at once faithful and pleasing. Among
early portrait figures of fine work in the British Museum may be
mentioned the ivory figure of a king, wearing a robe of elaborate
pattern (Table-case No. 197, in the Third Egyptian Room; see page
24, No. 7); the statue of the official Nefer-hi of the IIIrd dynasty
(No. 150, Wall-case 99, Third Egyptian Room); the statue of
Betchmes, of the IIIrd dynasty (No. 3, in the Egyptian Vestibule,
see page 110), and the statue of Ȧn-kheft-ka, of the IVth dynasty,
(Bay 1, No. 33, in the Northern Egyptian Gallery, see page 109).
Head of a colossal statue of Ȧmen-ḥetep III,
B. C. 1450.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 4, No. 416.]
PLATE XII.
Head of a stone figure of a priestess of the XVIIIth dynasty.
[From the cast, No. 38,430, Wall-case 102, Third Egyptian Room.]
PLATE XIII.

Limestone seated figures of Khā-em-Uast and his wife.
XIXth dynasty.
[No. 41,603, Wall-case 105, Third Egyptian Room.]
On the second shelf of Wall-cases 99-109 in the Third Egyptian
Room is exhibited a typical series of portrait figures in stone which
illustrate the work of the period between the IIIrd dynasty and the
Roman Period. Special attention may be given to the head of an
official (No. 186) in crystalline limestone; the figure of Queen
Tetȧ-Kharṭ, a wife of Ȧāḥmes I,.. 1600 (No. 187, see page 113);
B C
the portion of the head of a figure, the “heretic king,” Ȧmen-ḥetep
IV, or Khu-en-Ȧten,.. 1420 (No. 212); the figure of Queen
B C
Ȧmenȧrṭās, of the XXVth dynasty,.. 700 (No. 232); the seated
B C
figures of Khā-em-Uast and his wife (Wall-case 105, Third Egyptian
Room; see Plate XIII); the seated figure of Ḥarua, one of the
officials of Ȧmenȧrṭās (No. 234); the two figures of officials of the
Roman Period (Nos. 269 and 270); and the head of a priestess (see
Plate XII).
Statue of Isis, holding a figure of
Osiris. Dedicated by Shashanq, a high
official.
Ptolemaïc Period.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 28,
No. 964.]
In the Northern and Southern Egyptian Galleries among the finest
examples of large statues may be mentioned the three grey granite
statues of Usertsen III,.. 2330, each of which represents the
B C
king at a different period of his life (Nos. 158, 159, 160; see Plate
XXV); the dark granite head of Ȧmen-em-ḥāt III, of the XIIth
dynasty (No. 774; see Plate XXVI); the red granite statue of
Sekhem-uatch-taui-Rā, a king of the XIIIth dynasty (No. 276,
Plate XXVII); the head of Thothmes III,.. 1550 (No. 360;
B C
Plate XXXI); the heads of Ȧmen-ḥetep III,.. 1450 (Nos. 416,
B C
417); the white limestone statues of an official and his wife, of very
fine work (No. 565); and the granite statue of Isis holding a figure of

Osiris between her wings (No. 964). The statues and portrait figures
of the latter part of the XVIIIth, XIXth and XXth dynasties lack the
fidelity to nature of those of the Ancient and Middle Empires, and it
is clear that about.. 1200 both statues and figures were kept in
B C
stock by funerary masons, who merely added the names of
deceased persons to them after they were sold.
Under the Saïte kings of the XXVIth dynasty a Renaissance took
place, and for a short time painters, sculptors, and scribes modelled
their works on examples drawn chiefly from the monuments of the
Ancient Empire.

CHAPTER VI.
T K C O S S. M S.
HE ING AND HIS HIEF FFICERS OF TATE AND UBJECTS ILITARY ERVICE
The King of Egypt was absolute master of the country, which had
been given to him by the gods, and of every man, woman, and
child, and of everything in it from one end to the other. He was the
son of Ḥeru-ur, i. e., Horus the Great, the oldest of all the gods of
Egypt, whose attributes were, at a later period, usurped by Rā, the
Sun-god, and was declared to be of the very substance and essence
of the god. He was believed to be a god, and was worshipped as a
god, and his statues and figures were placed among the statues of
the gods, and with them received the adoration of men. His word on
any subject was final, his authority limitless, in his person he united
the intelligence and strength of all beings in heaven and on earth;
men lived by his grace only, and at a word from him they were slain.
In short, the Egyptians were serfs and bondmen of the king, the
counterpart, image and symbol of the god of heaven.
He possessed five great names or titles: 1. A Horus name, as
the descendant of Horus. 2. A Nebti name, as representative of
Nekhebit and Uatchit, the great goddesses of the South and North.
3. A Horus of gold name. The blood of the sun-god was supposed
to be made of gold, and as the divine blood ran in the king’s veins, a
“name of gold” was given to him. 4. A Suten Bȧt name, as king of
the South (Suten) and King of the North (Bȧt). 5. A Son of Rā
name, or personal name of the king. Thus, the five names of
Usertsen III were:
Horus name, N K. This was placed in a serekh thus:
ETER HEPERU
—

𓅃𓇴(cid:0)𓋹
𓉘(cid:0)𓊹𓆣𓅱
(cid:0)𓊂
The Horus name is sometimes called the “banner
name”; the serekh, however, is not a banner, but a
representation of a building of a funerary character.
Nebti name, N M
𓅒𓊹𓄠𓅱(cid:0)𓏏.
ETER ESTU
Horus of gold name, Ā K 𓅉𓋹𓆣.
NKH HEPER
Suten Bȧt name, K--R
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓈍𓂓𓂓𓂓(cid:0)𓍺.
HĀ KAU Ā
Son of Rā name, U
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓊃(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺.
SERTSEN
The oval in which the fourth and fifth names are placed, 𓍷, is
called in Egyptian Shennu, and is commonly known as the
“cartouche.” It was originally circular in form, 𓍶, like a signet ring,
and Besh, a king of the IInd dynasty, appears to have been the first
to use the cartouche. Another common title of the king was P -
ER ĀA
𓉐(cid:0)𓉻,
i. e., “Great House,” meaning the “house in which all men
live,” or the “Asylum of the Universe,” “Sublime Porte,” etc., which we
find in the Bible under the form of “Pharaoh.” The king being god
never died, and he owed the property of immortality which he
possessed to the “fluid of life” 𓎃𓈖𓋹, sa en ānkh, which he obtained
from Rā before his birth, for the god was believed to become
incarnate from time to time, and to consort with queen after queen,
so that his son might always sit on the throne of Egypt. The statues
of Rā, being inhabited by his doubles, were endowed with the “fluid
of life,” and this they transmitted to their human counterpart, the
king, by resting their hands upon his head, or by drawing them over
the back of his head and down his back. The king performed the
ceremonies of the “divine cult” daily, and as a result he drew from
the god each day a new supply of the “fluid of life,” which justified

him in adopting the title “Endowed with life, like Rā, for ever,”
𓏙𓋹𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓏇𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0).
The Queen was called either the “woman of the god,”
𓊹𓈞(cid:0)𓏏,
or
the “woman of the king,”
𓇓𓈞(cid:0)𓏏,
but she possessed several other
titles.
Seated figure of Qen-nefer, a prince and
overseer of the palace, about B. C. 1450.
[Central Saloon, No. 556.]
The official to whom the king entrusted the administration of the
country was called Erpā
𓂋(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓂝,
and of almost equal authority
was the Tchat
𓅷𓏏(cid:0)𓏤,
whose equivalent in modern times is the
Ḳâḍî, or Judge. Other high offices were Chief Councillor, 𓃥𓉪,
the Town Governor,
𓄓𓊖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏤,
the Chancellor,
𓆤𓏏(cid:0)𓋩,
and, of
course, the chiefs of the nomes, the officers of the Treasury, Army,
Works Department, Police and Law Courts, and Temples, each of
whom had his own staff. Titles often bestowed by the king were Ḥā
𓄂(cid:0)𓂝, Prince, and Smer 𓋴𓍋, Smer-uāt 𓋴𓍋𓌡(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏤, which mean
something like “friend,” and “only friend.” Picturesque titles appear
occasionally; thus one official calls himself “the eyes of the king in
the South, and his ears in the North,” “the eyes of the king in
Thebes,” etc. In the priesthood were the following grades: 1. The
neter ḥen, or servant of the god 𓊹𓍛; 2. The tef neter, father of the
god 𓊹𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓀀; 3. The āb, libationer 𓃂𓈗𓀀; 4. The Kher ḥeb, or
“Lector,” or “precentor”
𓌨(cid:0)𓂋𓎛𓃀𓎱𓀀,
etc. There were several kinds
of minor priests, e. g., the ḥen ka, or priest of the Ka, the sem, or
setem, the ȧmm ȧs, the ȧmm khent, and the ministrants in general.
The title of the high priest of Memphis was “Ur-kherp-ḥem,” i. e.,
“Great Chief of the hammer,” in allusion to his being priest of Ptaḥ,
the Blacksmith-god of Memphis; that of the high priest of
Heliopolis was “Ur-maau,” i. e., “great seer”; and that of the high
priest of Thebes was “Chief prophet of Ȧmen-Rā.” Among the

civilians the Scribes played the most prominent part in the
administration of the country, and in all periods both “royal scribes”
and “scribes” held many high offices, especially in connection with
the Treasury, and with institutions which possessed large properties,
such as the great temples of Heliopolis, Memphis, Saïs, Bubastis,
Abydos and Thebes.
Statues of Māḥu, a director of Works,
and Sebta, a priestess of Hathor, B. C.
1350.
[Central Saloon, No. 637.]
Military service.—The Egyptian was neither a fighting man nor a
soldier by nature, and except for a few comparatively short periods
in her history, Egypt never had an Army in the sense in which the
word is used by Western Nations. The Egyptian hated military
service, and in any conflict which resembled war he generally ran
away. When a hostile force threatened the country, the head of each
nome collected a number of men from his district, and armed them
as well as he could, and then sent his contingent to some place
appointed by the king. Individual nobles also, no doubt, sent
companies of men more or less armed from their estates to fight the
king’s battles. The peasant, or fellaḥ, was then, as now, a formidable
opponent in a fight, when armed with a stout stick, or club,
especially when he could fight under cover or behind a wall; but
anything like organized resistance terrified him, and rendered him
useless. On the other hand, the native of the Sûdân was a very fine
fighter, and whenever it was possible Pharaoh stiffened his troops
with regiments of Blacks. Thus, if we may believe the account of
Unȧ, the commander-in-chief of Pepi, a king of the VIth dynasty, his
army contained Blacks from every great province of the Sûdân, and
numbered “many times ten thousand.” In the Asiatic campaigns,
which produced such great spoil for Egypt, the organizers of these
wars, which are better termed “military raids,” and the finest fighters
in them were either Blacks, or of Sûdânî origin. Egypt had only need
of soldiers in the strict sense of the word when it was necessary to

suppress sudden rebellions in the provinces, or to compel tributary
kings to pay what was due from them, or to provide escorts to
Government trading expeditions. In times of peace the troops of the
militia laid down their clubs, bows, daggers, and spears, and worked
at their trades or cultivated the fields. Military exercises, drillings,
manœuvres, etc., there were none.
The Predynastic Egyptian warrior armed himself with a short,
stout stick; later it was weighted at one end with a piece of flint or
stone, and so became a kind of club. A flat piece of flint, or stone,
with a roughly-formed cutting edge, bound to a stick by thongs of
leather, served as an axe. Double-headed axes were also known,
and knives, spear-heads, arrow-heads, etc., were commonly
used.
The equipment of the soldier of the Ancient Empire was simple.
He wore a sort of skull cap, of leather(?), with a feather or two
stuck in the top; he fought with a club 𓌉, or mace, and a bow 𓌔,
carrying his flint-tipped arrows in a leather quiver slung over his
back, and he caught the blows and arrows of his foe on a large
leathern shield, which was sometimes ornamented with the badge
of his master or his family. At a later period he wore a leathern
shirt to protect his body, and he added to his arms a long spear, a
(cid:0)(cid:0)
knife, or dagger, with a curved blade, and sometimes a
battle-axe. The equipment of the mercenaries of a still later period
differed in many details from that of the native Egyptian. (For
examples of bows, arrows, daggers, spears, etc., see Table-case B in
the Third Egyptian Room.)
The horse and chariot were unused in Egypt before the kings of
the XVIIIth dynasty began to make conquests in Western Asia. At a
comparatively early period the Egyptians began to fortify their towns
with walls and strong gates, and in the XIIth dynasty King Usertsen
III erected a series of forts in the Second Cataract to prevent the
Nubians from descending the river and laying Egypt waste. One
strong fort was built near Buhen (Wâdî Ḥalfah), another on the
island now called Jazîrat al-Malik, one at Semnah, and another

exactly opposite at Kummah. The walls were built of mud bricks,
many feet thick, and long slopes cased with stone were built against
them. Within each enclosure were series of chambers for
storehouses and barracks, and at one corner a small temple,
dedicated to the chief god of the district. Another series of forts was
built on the frontier between the north-east line of the Delta and
Syria, generally of great strength.
The geographical position of Egypt made it unnecessary for her to
possess a navy, and, moreover, the peasants were as little fitted to
become sailors as soldiers. The most important sea-fight in which
the Egyptians took part was the engagement in which Rameses III
(.. 1200, or later) vanquished the confederation of Libyan tribes.
B C
This king built war-ships, and manned them with crews from the
seafaring peoples of the Mediterranean, and he succeeded in gaining
a signal victory by sea and land over his enemies.

CHAPTER VII.
E R. E S, F, C G. T
GYPTIAN ELIGION ARLY BELIEF IN PIRITS ETISHES OMPANIES OF ODS HE
W G “.” L. P. O G.
ORD FOR OD AND GOD IST OF GODS OLYTHEISM NENESS OF OD
L. O R. T J. T
EGENDS OF THE GODS SIRIS AND THE ESURRECTION HE UDGMENT HE
O W. D R. A.
THER ORLD OCTRINE OF ETRIBUTION MULETS
Predynastic Religion.—From the evidence derived from a
number of Predynastic graves it is perfectly clear that the
Predynastic Egyptians believed in a future life; for otherwise they
never would have buried with the dead food and flint weapons, etc.,
for the chase in the Other World. Whether they believed that the
future life would be eternal cannot be said; but they certainly hoped
that it would resemble the life on this earth.
Dynastic.—The religion of the ancient Egyptians was of African
origin, and in the earliest times had much in common with that of
many of the peoples and tribes who live in Equatorial Africa at the
present day. Earth, air, sea and sky were believed to be filled with
spirits, some of whom were occupied in carrying on the works of
nature, and others in aiding or injuring man upon earth. Every
object, both animate and inanimate, was inhabited by a spirit, which
could assume any form it pleased, and occupy the body of any man,
woman, quadruped, bird, fish, insect, reptile, tree, etc. The
incarnations of certain of these spirits became gods at a very early
[19]
period, e. g., the hippopotamus, crocodile, lion, bull, ram, dog-
headed ape, dog, wolf, jackal, ichneumon, hawk, vulture, ibis,
swallow, dove, and heron, certain kinds of snakes, uraeus, frog,
beetle, grasshopper, mantis, and several kinds of fish. All the above
were regarded as powers of good from the earliest to the latest
times. On the other hand, certain animals, e. g., gazelle, the animal
which is the symbol of Set, 𓃩, or 𓃫, the hyaena, the lynx, the

scorpion, the turtle, were incarnations of powers of evil. The
heavenly bodies were regarded as powers of good, probably, in the
earliest times; but the scorching heat of the sun, lightning,
hurricanes, storms, flood, darkness, mist and fog were regarded as
manifestations of spirits hostile to man.
In addition, the primitive Egyptians fashioned symbols of spirits,
much in the same way as the native of Central Africa makes
[20]
“fetishes.” All these they worshipped because they admired some
quality or attribute in them, or because they feared them; and the
religion of the earliest period consisted of the performance of rites
and ceremonies which had for their object the propitiation of them.
Men gave gifts to the incarnations of the spirits to persuade them to
withhold the evils which they might inflict upon them, and to protect
them from every calamity; moreover, they appealed to them as
possessing the same feelings and passions as human beings. The
dead were assumed to enjoy a renewed existence in the Other
World, probably with benevolent spirits; it is quite certain that this
belief was current among the primitive Egyptians, at least among
those who lived during the latter half of the Neolithic Period. Every
district and every large city or town had its own spirit or object of
worship, and most of the gods of Egypt of the Dynastic Period were
selected from them; often, no doubt, their names were changed,
and their attributes added to.
At a very early period an attempt was made to group the gods
into families containing husband, wife, and son; these are usually
called triads, examples of which are: Ȧmen-Rā, Mut and Khensu at
Thebes; Ba-neb-Ṭeṭ, Ḥāt-meḥit and Ḥeru-pa-kharṭ at Mendes; Ptaḥ,
Sekhet and I-em-ḥetep at Memphis. Another attempt to group the
gods resulted in the Ennead or Company of nine or more gods.
Ȧmen-Rā. Ȧmsu or Menu. Ȧmset. Anubis. Ȧsȧr (Osiris). Ȧsȧr (Osiris).
Ȧsȧr-Ḥāp (Serapis). Ȧtmu. Bennu. Bes. Ḥāpi (Nile-god).
Ḥāpi. Horus. Ḥeru-pa-kharṭ (Harpokrates). Kheperȧ. Khnemu. Khensu.
Menthu-Rā. Nefer-Tem. Ptaḥ. Ptaḥ-Seker. Qebḥsennuf.
Rā-Ḥeru-Khu (Rā-Harmakhis). Reshpu. Reshpu. Seb (Ḳeb). Sebek.

Seker. Set. Ṭeṭ. Teḥuti (Thoth). Ṭuamutef.
Ȧnit. Ānthȧt. Ānqet. Ȧst (Isis). Ḥet-Ḥeru (Hathor).
Ḥet-Ḥeru (Hathor). Ḥet-Ḥeru (Hathor). Qeṭesh. Maāt. Menḥet.
Mert. Mut. Nebt-ḥet (Nephthys). Nebt-ḥet (Nephthys). Nekhebit.
Net (Neith). Nut. Renenet. Satet. Sesheta (Sefekh-ābui).
Sekhet. Serqet. Taurt (Thoueris). Uatchit. Urt-Ḥekau.
At Heliopolis, the On of the Bible, the priests proclaimed the
existence of three Companies of the gods. The first Company was
called the “Great”
𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓉻(cid:0)𓏏,
the second the “Little”
𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓅪(cid:0)𓏏,
and the third had no special title; these Companies
represented the gods of heaven, earth, and the Other World
respectively. When all three companies were invoked they were
represented thus: 𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹𓊹. The gods of the Great
Company were: Temu, Shu, Tefnut, Seb, Nut, Osiris, Isis, Set,
Nephthys; Khenti-Ȧmenti, Rā, Horus, and Uatchit were sometimes
added. The gods of the Little Company were: Rā, Ȧm-Ȧnnu, Ȧm-
Āntchet, Ȧm-Ḥet-Serqet, Ȧm-neter-ḥet, Ȧm-ḥetch-paār, Ȧm-Saḥ, Ȧm-
Ṭep, Ȧm-Ḥet-ur-Rā, Ȧm-Unnu-resu, and Ȧm-Unnu-meḥt.
The common Egyptian word for God and god is
𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂋,
NETER
which is symbolized by the sign 𓊹; goddess is
NETERT
𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂋𓏏(cid:0)𓆇; the plurals are 𓊹𓊹𓊹 or 𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂋𓅱𓀭𓏪 “gods,”
NETERU
and
𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂋𓇌𓏏𓆗𓏪
“goddesses.” The original meaning of the
NETERIT
word is unknown, but in the Dynastic Period it probably meant
NETER
“high, exalted, sublime, divine, godlike,” etc.
The following are some of the principal gods and goddesses, and
the visitor will find an unrivalled series of figures of most of them in
bronze, wood, stone, etc., exhibited in Wall-cases 119-132 in the
Third Egyptian Room. Full descriptions will be found in the Guide to
the Third and Fourth Egyptian Rooms, pp. 116-168:—

Ȧ, Osiris,
𓁹(cid:0)𓊨(cid:0)𓀭,
the man-god who rose from the
SȦR
dead, was deified, and became the king of the Other
World and judge of the Dead.
Ȧ, Isis,
𓊨𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0), the sister-wife of Osiris.
ST
S
𓋴𓏏(cid:0)𓈜𓁣,
the principle of Evil, and opponent of Osiris.
ET
N -, Nephthys,
(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
the wife of Set.
EBT ḤET
Ȧ, Anubis,
𓇋𓈖(cid:0)𓊪𓅱(cid:0), the Dog-god, or Jackal-god, son of
NPU
Set.
Ȧ -
𓄋(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏴𓈐(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏦,
the Wolf-god, a friend and
P UAT
companion of Osiris.
Ḥ, Horus,
𓅃(cid:0)𓏤𓀭,
existed in several forms, e. g., Horus the
ERU
Elder (Arouëris), Horus the Blind, Horus the Child
(Harpokrates), Horus, son of Osiris, Horus, son of Isis,
etc.
N
𓏍(cid:0)𓇯𓀭,
god of the primeval watery mass out of which
U
the world was made.
Ḥ
𓎛𓂝(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏭𓈘(cid:0)𓈗𓀭,
the Nile-god.
ĀPI
K
𓐍(cid:0)𓊪𓆣𓂋𓇋𓀭,
the creator of the universe whose
HEPERȦ
dwelling was Nu.
T, Thoth,
𓅝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓀭,
who created the world and all
EḤUTI
things in it by a word.
K 𓎸𓅓𓅱𓀭, who assisted in carrying out the work of
HNEMU
creation.
P
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓀭,
who assisted Khnemu in the work of creation.
TAḤ
R
𓂋(cid:0)𓂝𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓀭,
the Sun-god.
Ā

S (Ḳ ) 𓅬𓃀, the Earth-god.
EB EB
S 𓆄𓅱𓀭, the god of the air.
HU
Ḥ -Ḥ, Hathor, 𓉡, a sky-goddess, who existed in seven
ET ERU
forms.
N
𓏌(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇯𓁐,
a sky-goddess.
UT
T
𓏏(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓏌(cid:0)𓏏𓁐,
a rain-goddess.
EFNUT
N
𓇑𓏌(cid:0)𓏏𓁐,
the great goddess of the South.
EKHEBIT
U
𓇅𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
the great goddess of the North.
ATCHIT
N, Neith,
𓋋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
the self-created goddess of Saïs, who
ET
existed in four forms.
B
𓎰𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
the great goddess of Bubastis.
AST
M, or Ȧ
𓋉(cid:0)𓊾𓀭,
god of virility and generation.
ENU MSU
B 𓃀𓋴𓁲, ⎫
ES
Ā
𓂝(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈎𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓆗, ⎪
NQET
S 𓄝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓆗, ⎪ gods of the
ATIT
Sûdân.
Ṭ
𓂧(cid:0)𓂧𓃹(cid:0)𓈖𓀭, ⎪
EṬUN
M 𓌻𓅱𓏩𓃭, or M ⎭
ERUL ENRUIL
𓈘(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓂋𓏲(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓊹.
T
𓏏(cid:0)𓍃𓅓𓅱,
the Man-god, who always appears in human
EMU
form.
Ḥ
𓎛𓐑(cid:0)𓊪𓀭, ⎫ The divine sons of Horus, son of Osiris,
ĀP
who assisted their father in performing
M ESTHȦ
𓐝(cid:0)𓊃𓍘𓇋𓀭, ⎪
the ceremonies connected with the
mummifying and burial of Osiris.

Q 𓏁𓌣𓏪𓆑𓀭, ⎪
EBḤSENNUF
Ṭ ⎭
UAMUTEF
𓇼𓄿𓅐𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓀭,
Ȧ
𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓀭,
or Ȧ -R
𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓂋(cid:0)𓂝(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓀭,
the
MEN MEN Ā
great god of Thebes.
M
𓅐𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
the female counterpart of Ȧmen-Rā.
UT
K
𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓇓𓅱𓀭,
the son of Ȧmen and Mut. Like Horus he
HENSU
had seven forms.
I
𓂻(cid:0)𓏲𓊃(cid:0)𓂝𓄿𓋴𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
a goddess of Heliopolis.
USĀASET
I--(Imouthis)
𓇍𓅓𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪𓀭,
a deified physician of
EM ḤETEP
Memphis.
S
𓊃(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓂋𓀭,
god of the dead of Memphis.
EKER
N -T
𓄤𓆑(cid:0)𓂋𓏏(cid:0)𓍃𓅓𓀭,
a god of Memphis. The lotus
EFER EM
was his symbol.
M
𓌷(cid:0)𓂝𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁦,
goddess of wisdom, right, truth, law,
AĀT
order, etc.
S
𓋇𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
goddess of literature.
ESHETA
M
𓄠𓋴𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓏏(cid:0)𓈜𓁐,
goddess of birth.
ESKHENIT
R
𓂋(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈖𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓁐,
goddess of fertility, the harvest,
ENENIT
etc.
M -
𓎖𓎛𓅨(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏,
a very ancient sky-goddess.
EḤ URIT
S
𓋴𓐍(cid:0)𓏏𓌂𓁐,
a fire-goddess, the female counterpart of
EKHET
Ptaḥ.
T -
𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓈇𓇑𓇑𓈖(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0), a very ancient earth-god.
A TENEN

M
𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍿𓅱𓀭,
an ancient war-god.
ENTHU
Ȧ
𓇋𓏏(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓇳,
the god of the solar disk.
TEN
FOREIGN GODS AND GODDESSES.
Ā
𓂝(cid:0)𓈖𓍘𓇋𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓆗,
a goddess of Syrian origin.
NTHȦT
Ā
𓂝(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍿𓂋(cid:0)𓏤𓍘𓇋𓆗,
goddess of the Kheta.
NTHRETHȦ
Ā
𓂝(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓍿𓇋𓂋(cid:0)𓍿𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓆗,
Ashtoreth, a
STHȦRETHIT
goddess of Syrian origin.
Q
𓊧𓂧(cid:0)𓈚𓆗,
goddess of Syrian origin.
EṬESH
K
𓎡(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓆗,
a goddess of Syrian origin.
ENT
Ā
𓉻(cid:0)𓂝(cid:0)𓏛𓋴𓏭𓍘𓆗,
a goddess of the Eastern Desert.
ASITH
B
𓃀𓂝(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓂋𓏤𓍘𓇋(cid:0), i. e., Beltis, counterpart of Ba’al
ĀIRTHȦ
Sephôn.
B
𓃀𓂝(cid:0)𓂋𓃩,
i. e., “Baal,” a Syrian war-god.
ĀR
R
𓂋(cid:0)𓈚𓊪𓅱𓀭,
god of the lightning and thunderbolt.
ESHPU
S
𓇓𓅱𓏏(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0), one of the chief gods of the Kheta and
UTEKH
Syrians.
ANIMAL-GODS AND GODDESSES, ETC.
Ḥ
𓐑(cid:0)𓊪𓃒,
the Apis Bull.
ĀP
M -
𓅨(cid:0)𓂋𓉕𓃒,
the Mnevis Bull.
ER UR
B
𓃀𓄡(cid:0), the Bachis Bull.
AKHA

B 𓃝, the Ram-god.
A
S 𓋴𓃀𓎡𓆋, the Crocodile god.
EBEK
T -
𓏏𓄿𓅨(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓆗 ⎫
A URT
R
𓂋(cid:0)𓂋𓏏(cid:0)𓏲𓄛 ⎪
ERIT
The Hippopotamus-goddesses.
Ȧ
𓇋𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓄛 ⎪
PIT
S
𓈚(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏲𓏏(cid:0)𓆇 ⎭
HEPUIT
M-𓌳𓎛𓎿𓋴𓁻, the Lion-god; lion-goddesses were numerous,
A ḤES
e. g., Sekhet, Pekhth, Tefnut, etc.
M
𓌳𓄿𓆑(cid:0)𓂧(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0), the Lynx-goddess.
AFṬET
B
𓎯𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0), the Cat-goddess; the word for “cat” was Mȧu
AST
𓏇𓇋𓅱𓃠.
Ȧ
𓇋𓈖(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓅱(cid:0), the Dog, or Jackal-god.
NPU
A
𓄋(cid:0)𓈐(cid:0), the Wolf-god.
PUAT
K
𓆼𓄿𓏏(cid:0)𓂋𓅱,
the Ichneumon-god.
HATRU
The following birds were sacred: The phoenix, Bennu
𓃀𓈖(cid:0)𓏌(cid:0)𓅱𓅣;
the vulture, Nerȧu
𓈖(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓅱𓅐;
the hawk, Bȧk
𓃀𓇋𓎡𓅄; the hawk of gold, Bȧk en nub 𓃀𓇋𓎡𓅄𓈖𓋞(cid:0)𓈒(cid:0)𓏦; the divine
hawk, Bȧk netri, 𓃀𓇋𓎡𓅄𓊹𓏏(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏭𓏜; the ibis, Habû 𓉔𓄿𓃀𓅱𓅝; the
swallow, Ment 𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓅨; the goose, 𓅬, of which there were
several kinds; etc.
The following reptiles and insects were sacred: the turtle, Āpesh
𓂝(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓈚𓆉,
or Sheta
𓈚(cid:0)𓏏𓄿𓆉;
the snake, Sa-ta
𓅭𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇;
the scorpion, Serk
𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0); the Āpshait beetle,
𓂝(cid:0)𓊪𓆷𓄿𓇌𓆤;

the “praying mantis”, Ābit 𓍋𓃀𓇋𓇋𓏏𓅬; the grasshopper, Saneḥemu,
𓅭𓈖(cid:0)𓈞𓅓𓅱𓆧;
Kheprerȧ the beetle, Scarabaeus sacer,
𓆣𓂋(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓅬.
The following fish were sacred: The Ȧbṭu 𓋁𓃀𓂧𓅱𓆟; the Ȧnt
𓇋𓆛(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓆟,
which announced the rise of the Nile; the Āḥa
𓂚𓄿𓆟; the Āṭ 𓂝(cid:0)𓂧𓆟; the Utu 𓎘𓅱𓆟; the Meḥit 𓎖𓎛𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓆟; the
Nār
𓈖(cid:0)𓂝(cid:0)𓂋𓆟;
etc. Classical writers mention the Oxyrhynchus,
the Phagrus, the Latus, the Lepidotus, the Silurus, the Maeotes, etc.,
but authorities differ in their identifications.
Number of the gods.—As every district, city, town, and village
possessed a god, with a female counterpart and a son, and also a
being of evil, or devil, to say nothing of the creatures who, in
modern times, would be called vaguely “spirits,” or “fairies,” it follows
that the “gods” of the Egyptians must have been very numerous.
The names of a great many have been lost, but about 200 gods are
mentioned in the Pyramid Texts, about 480 in the Theban Recension
of the Book of the Dead, and about 1,200 in the various works which
deal with the Other World; a total of about 2,200 names has been
noted. The Egyptians tried to reduce the large number of their gods
by declaring that their gods were merely forms of the great Sun-god
Rā, who was said to have “created the names of his members, which
became the gods who are in the following of Rā” (Book of the Dead,
xvii, 11). The Egyptian system of Polytheism (not Pantheism)
appears to have been well suited to the early conditions of the
country, but several facts make it certain that attempts were made
by the priests to give their religion a distinctly monotheistic
character. The results of their endeavours in this respect find
expression in many texts. Under the Ancient Empire we read in the
Pyramid Texts of a God who was the lord of heaven, who gave life to
the dead, and who was entirely different in every way from the
“gods.” In Moral Precepts we have such phrases as: “The things
which God doeth cannot be known.” “The eating of bread is
according to the plan of God,” i. e., a man’s food comes to him
through the Providence of God. “Labour in the field which God hath

given thee.” “God loveth obedience and hateth disobedience.” “Verily
[21]
a good son is the gift of God.” “God is the righteous judge.”
“Wrong not thy mother lest she lift up her hands to God, and He
hear her complaints (and punish thee).” “The multiplying of words is
an abomination to the sanctuary of God.” And the official Paḥeri says
in his Biography (line 42): “I never told lies to another man, for I
knew that God dwelt among men, and I recognised Him”:—
𓂜𓆓(cid:0)𓂧𓇋𓎼(cid:0)𓂋𓍅𓅪(cid:0)𓏥𓂋𓎡(cid:0)𓇌𓀀𓂋(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏛𓎡(cid:0)𓅱𓀀𓊹(cid:0)𓏤𓇋𓏶
(cid:0)𓏭𓂋(cid:0)𓍿𓀀𓁐𓏪𓋷𓄿𓀁𓇋𓇓𓅱
In funerary texts the god referred to may possibly be Osiris, god
and judge of the dead, but in the Moral Precepts quoted above this
is impossible, and it follows that the Egyptians believed in a God
Who was wholly apart from the “Companies of Gods,” and in His
wise, inscrutable, and kindly Providence.
The doctrine of Oneness, or Unity, we find in connection with
the great God who created the universe and all that is in it, by
whatsoever name he be called, Rā, or Tem, or Kheperȧ, or Ptaḥ, or
Khnemu, or Ȧten. Thus Rā is the “Lord of heaven, lord of earth,
maker of beings celestial, and of beings terrestrial, the One God,
who came into being in primeval time, maker of the world, creator of
men, maker of the sky, creator of the Nile, fashioner of whatsoever
is in the waters, and creator of their life, maker of mountains,
creator of men, and women, and beasts, and cattle, and the
heavens and the earth” (Book of the Dead, Chapter CLXXII). In
another passage it is said of this same god: “He is the divine matter
which produced the Two Companies of Gods, every god came into
being through him, God One alone,
𓌡(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓂝𓌡(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓂝𓏲(cid:0)𓏭𓀭.
He
made what is when the earth began in primeval time, his births are
hidden, his transformations are multitudinous, and his similitude
cannot be known.” It has been argued that the Egyptian idea of the
Oneness of a god is a totally different thing from Monotheism, but,
taking the facts as they stand, we are justified in saying that when
the Egyptian declared that his god was One, neter uā
𓊹𓀭𓌡(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓂝,

his meaning was identical with that expressed by the Hebrew in the
words, “The Lord our God is one” (Deuteronomy vi, 4), and by the
Arab in his declaration, “God, He is one” (Kur’ân, Surah cxii).
The principal religious beliefs of the Egyptians may be summarized
thus: The Creation.—In the beginning there existed an immense
mass of water wherein lived the god Nu. He felt the desire to create
this universe, and his heart, or intelligence, who was called Thoth,
spake a word expressing this desire, and the world came into being.
The first act of creation was the appearance of the sun from out of
the water; the light separated the heavens from the earth, and the
sky was placed upon four pillars 𓉽𓉽𓉽𓉽, which marked the cardinal
points.
The god Khnemu fashioning a man on a potter’s wheel which he works with his
foot. Behind stands Thoth, marking the years of his life on a notched palm branch.
Creation of gods.—According to the priests of On, the god
Kheperȧ, a form of Rā, who was self-begotten and self-produced,
fashioned a god and a goddess out of the matter of his own body,
and these became the parents of a number of other gods and
goddesses, e. g., Osiris and Isis, Set and Nephthys, Horus and
Anubis, etc. The priests of Hermopolis declared that Thoth was the
primeval god, and that the gods he created were Nu and Nut, Ḥeḥu
and Ḥeḥut, Kekui and Kekuit, Ḳerḥ and Ḳerḥit. The first pair
represent the watery mass out of which everything came; the
second, indefinite time, or eternity; the third, darkness; and the
fourth, night. The priests of Saïs taught that their goddess Net
(Neith) was self-begotten and self-produced, that she was the
mother of Rā, the Sun-god, and at the same time a virgin-goddess.
Creation of men.—According to a very old legend, mankind was
divided into four races: 1. R, or R, i. e., “Men,”
𓂋(cid:0)𓍿𓀀𓁐𓏪;
ETH EMT
these were the Egyptians. 2. Ā 𓌙𓅓𓅱𓏪, or the peoples of the
AMU
Eastern Desert. 3. T
𓍿(cid:0)𓎖𓅱𓏪,
i. e., the Libyans. 4. N
HEMEḤU EḤESU
𓅘𓎛𓋴𓅱𓏪, i. e., the black and brown peoples, and Negroes and Negroids,
of the Sûdân. The Egyptians or “Men,” were formed out of the tears

which fell from the Eye of Rā; these dropped upon the members of
his body and then turned into men and women. The Libyans came
into being through some act of the Sun-god in connection with his
Eye, and the Āamu and the Neḥesu were descended irregularly from
Rā. Another legend declared that man was made out of potters’ mud
on a wheel by Khnemu, the ram-headed god of Philae.
Destruction of mankind.—After Rā had been reigning for a
considerable time, men and women began to speak contemptuously
of him, and to blaspheme him. Rā assembled the gods and took
counsel with them, and, as the result, he sent forth his Eye among
mankind in the form of the goddess Hathor, who destroyed men
from off the earth with the exception of a small company. The
goddess Sekhet assisted in the slaughter, and for several days
wandered about Egypt wading in pools of men’s blood. At length Rā
was appeased, and he stopped the work of slaughter; but he was
weary of man, and determined to withdraw himself from the
management of his affairs. After taking further counsel with the
gods he retreated to a newly-constituted portion of heaven, and
created there the Sekhet-ḥetepet, or Elysian Fields.
According to another legend preserved in the CLXXVth Chapter of
the Book of the Dead (Papyrus of Ani, No. 10,470), a general
destruction of mankind was caused by the Flood, which was
brought upon the world by the god Temu, who announced his
intention of destroying everything in it, and of covering the earth
with the waters of the primeval ocean Nu. The flood appears to have
begun at Ḥenensu, in Upper Egypt, the Khânês of Isaiah xxx, 4, and
the Herakleopolis of the Greeks, and to have submerged all Egypt.
All life was destroyed, and the only beings who survived were those
who were in the “Boat of Millions of Years,” i. e., the Ark of the Sun-
god, with the god Temu. The mutilated state of a large portion of
the text makes it impossible to piece the details together, but it
seems that, after the earth was covered by the Flood, Temu sailed
over the waters to the Island of Flame, and took up his abode there.
Subsequently he was succeeded by Osiris, whose authority was

disputed by Set, the god of evil; but eventually Set was overthrown,
and Osiris ruled triumphantly.
The Legend of Horus and Set.—In very early times legends
were current concerning the great fight which took place between
Horus the Great, the Sun-god, the god of day, light, life, and of all
physical and moral good, and Set, the god of night, darkness, death,
and of all physical and moral evil. Set succeeded in carrying off the
Eye of Horus, i. e., the Sun, and tried to devour it, but the Eye of
Horus inflicted a deadly wound on Set, and cut off and carried away
one of his thighs. At length Thoth, the intelligence of Rā, interfered,
and made an arrangement between the two combatant gods,
whereby the day (Horus) was to be a certain length, and the night
(Set) likewise, and neither was to destroy the other. Because of this
decision Thoth was called “Ȧp reḥui,” or “Judge of the Combatants.”
Now the moon was the second, or left, eye of Horus the Great, and
it was much persecuted by Set during fourteen nights of every
month. Each night Set succeeded in cutting off a piece from it, and
at length no moon was left. Thoth, however, made new moons,
which he placed in the sky month by month, and thus frustrated the
evil deeds of Set. On one occasion Set was wandering about the sky
in the evening and found there the crescent, or new moon, which he
immediately swallowed, but he was eventually made to disgorge it
by Thoth, who was watching over it. At a later period, when the
moon was identified with Osiris, the enmity of Set was transferred to
Osiris, and the legend entered upon a new phase; Osiris became the
symbol of moral good, and Set of moral evil and wickedness.
The views held by the Egyptians about Osiris from about.. 3800
B C
to the Roman Period may be thus summarized:—Legend of Osiris.
—Osiris, in Egyptian Ȧ
𓁹(cid:0)𓊨,
was once a king who reigned in the
SȦR
south of Egypt; his sister-wife was called Isis, in Egyptian Ȧ 𓊨𓏏,
ST
and their son Horus, in Egyptian Ḥ 𓅃. He did great good to all his
ERU
people, and taught them the arts of agriculture, and made good
laws for them, and ruled them justly. Now Osiris had a twin brother
called Set
𓊃(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓈜,
the S of Plutarch, who was very jealous of
ÊTH

him, and who lost no opportunity of undermining his authority and
reviling him, for he wished to see Osiris removed from his path, so
that he might seize his brother’s throne and wife. At length, by a
stratagem, he managed to kill Osiris, by drowning him in the Nile.
The river, however, carried the dead body of Osiris to the papyrus
swamps in the Delta, where the waters deposited it on the lower
branches of an acacia tree, which grew up round it and concealed it.
Isis discovered, by magical means, where her husband’s body was,
and went to the place and took possession of it. Wishing to visit her
son Horus, so that she might urge him to take vengeance on Set,
she hid the body in a secret spot, and went off to the city of Buto to
Horus. During her absence, Set found the body one night when he
was out hunting, and recognizing it, he tore it into fourteen pieces,
which he scattered about the country. Isis, having heard what Set
had done, set out and collected the portions of the body of Osiris,
and wherever she found one of them she buried it, and built a shrine
over it.
Osiris rising from the sarcophagus with “life” in each hand. On each side are two
of the children of Horus.
Now Isis was a great enchantress, and she learned from Thoth the
knowledge of magical ceremonies and of most potent words of
power. She was able to transform herself into any kind of creature,
and to travel through earth, air, fire, or water with equal ease.
Instructed by his mother, Horus, with the assistance of a number of
his “followers,” performed a series of ceremonies connected with the
burial of his father, which had the effect of raising Osiris from the
dead, and of establishing him as king in Ȧmenti, i. e., the “Hidden
Place,” or the Other World. When this was done, Osiris appeared to
Horus and urged him to avenge him on Set, and shortly afterwards a
great fight between Horus and Set took place. Set was defeated
and, according to the XVIIth Chapter of the Book of the Dead,
mutilated by Horus, who suffered no injury whatsoever. The great
fight took place near the modern city of Asyûṭ, and lasted three
days; each god fought in the form of a wolf or bear. (Fourth Sallier
Papyrus in the British Museum.)

The cult of Osiris is as old as Dynastic Egyptian civilization, and,
from the earliest to the latest times, he was regarded as the god-
man who suffered, died, rose again, and reigned eternally in heaven.
He was the “King of eternity, lord of the everlastingness, the prince
of gods and men, the god of gods, king of kings, lord of lords, prince
of princes, the governor of the world, whose existence is
everlasting” (Papyrus of Ani, Plate I). To the Egyptians Osiris was the
god who “made men and women to be born again,”
𓄠𓋴𓏏(cid:0)𓍃(cid:0)𓅱𓀀𓁐𓏪(cid:0)𓄙(cid:0), who made them to rise from the dead, and
bestowed upon them everlasting life; he was, in all times, the cause
of their resurrection, and was also the resurrection itself. He was
both god and man, and could sympathize with them in sickness and
death, and the idea of his human personality brought them comfort.
The confidence with which men looked to him as a being who knew
neither decay nor corruption is best expressed in the words of a text
on coffin No. 22,940 (Wall-case No. 40, First Egyptian Room).
“Homage to thee, O my father Osiris! Thy flesh suffered no decay,
worms touched thee not, thou didst not moulder away, withering
came not on thee, and thou didst not suffer corruption; and I shall
possess my flesh for ever and ever, I shall not crumble away, I shall
not wither, I shall not become corruption.”
The Kingdom of Osiris was situated in Sekhet-ḥetep
𓇏𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓈇(cid:0)𓏤𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪𓊖,
i. e., the “Field of Peace,” a division of
Sekhet-Ȧaru, or the “Field of Reeds.” From the pictures of this region
given in papyri we see that it was surrounded by a stream of water,
and intersected by numerous canals, and, judging by the
descriptions given in these pictures, it must have been considered to
be a very fertile place. The wheat and the barley there grew to a
great height, and plants, vegetables, and fruit trees abounded. The
idea of the Sekhet-ḥetep was no doubt suggested by the fertile
regions of the Delta and the Oases in the Western Desert.
Osiris in his shrine.

Thoth in the form of an ape weighing the heart in
the presence of Osiris.
The goddess Maāt weighing the heart in
the presence of the ape of Thoth. By her
side is the Eater of the Dead.
The Judgment of Osiris, from the Book of Gates.
A Osiris seated on a throne with nine steps.
B The scales in which the hearts of the dead were weighed.
C The pig, symbol of evil, in a boat under the charge of an ape, the companion of
Thoth.
D Anubis, the god of the tomb.
E Heads of gazelle, typical of the enemies of Osiris.
In one part of this kingdom was placed the Judgment Hall of
Osiris, and there sat the great judge of the dead. The soul of every
man was brought there and weighed in the “Great Balance” in his
presence, by Thoth, the scribe of the gods. The soul was
represented by the heart 𓄣, and was weighed against the feather 𓆄,
symbolic of righteousness (maāt). If the heart failed to
counterbalance the feather it was cast to an animal monster called
Ām-mit, i. e., “Eater of the Dead,” which was part crocodile, part lion,
and part hippopotamus. When the heart and the feather balanced
exactly Thoth announced the fact to the gods of his company, and
then the soul of the deceased was taken by Horus into the presence
of Osiris, who rewarded him according to his deserts. Before the
weighing of the heart took place the deceased was obliged,
presumably, to pass along the Hall of Osiris, and to make the
Negative Confession before the Two and Forty Assessors of the
Dead, “who tried sinners, and fed upon their blood, on the day when
the lives of men are reckoned up in the presence of the Good Being”
(Osiris). Apparently each of these beings asked him the question:
“Hast thou committed such and such a sin”? For his answers, as
given in the Book of the Dead (Chapter CXXV), take these forms:—

“Hail, Long-strider, coming from Ȧnnu, I have not committed
iniquity.
“Hail, Eater of shades, coming from Qerti, I have not stolen.
“Hail, Bad-face, coming from Re-stau, I have killed neither
man nor woman.
“Hail, Flame, advancing and retreating, I have not robbed
God.
“Hail, Uamemti, coming from the house of slaughter, I have
not committed adultery.
“Hail, Two-horns, coming from Saïs, I have not multiplied
words overmuch.”
The forty-two sins enumerated in the Negative Confession
represent the chief sins abominated by the Egyptians under the
XVIIIth dynasty.
The texts connected with the examination of the dead show that
the Egyptian idea of sin was different from that of Western nations.
With the Egyptian the commission of sin was regarded merely as a
breach of the ritual law, or of the law of the community, and could
be atoned for by the payment of goods or possessions; this payment
once made, the law-breaker considered that he was free from all
obligation, real or moral. The idea of repentance finds no
expression in Egyptian texts, and, curiously enough, there is no word
in Coptic for “repentance.” The translators of the New Testament
from Greek into Coptic were obliged to use the Greek word
μετάνοια. From the earliest times the Egyptians appear to have
believed firmly that the righteous would be rewarded in the Other
World, and the wicked punished, but there is no definite statement
on this point in the texts until the XIXth dynasty, when the doctrine
of retribution is clearly expressed. In the Second Part of the “Book
of Gates” a number of beings are described as “those who
worshipped Rā upon earth, who spake words of power against the
Evil One (Āpep), who made offerings to Rā, and burnt incense to

their own gods.” Other beings are described as “those who spake
truth upon earth, and who did not approach false gods”
𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂋𓇌𓅪(cid:0)𓏥.
In return for this Rā gave to them food and
drink which should never fail, and decreed that their souls should
never be hacked in pieces. Close by, in the same section of the work,
are mentioned the “rebels against Rā, who blasphemed the god
when they were upon earth, who thrust aside right, and cursed the
god of the horizon.” As punishment for these deeds Rā decreed that
they should be bound in chains, that their bodies should be cut in
pieces, and their souls destroyed.
The rewards of the righteous were, moreover, graduated, for
when Osiris decreed that such and such a soul was to receive an
estate in his kingdom, the land measurers of heaven took their
measuring ropes with them, and going into the Elysian Fields
measured out for those who were deemed righteous plots, which
varied in size according to their merits. According to another view
the blessed lived always with the Sun-god in his boat, and travelled
with him across the sky day by day. The “gods” in heaven spent
their lives in ministering to their god Osiris, or Rā, and in performing
his commands, and the duty of a certain number of them consisted
in singing to him and praising him at dawn and at sunset. The spirits
and souls of the righteous, in their glorified bodies, became “beings
and messengers” of God, and they sat on the great throne by his
side. They wore the finest raiment, and white linen garments and
sandals, they ate of the “tree of life”
𓆱(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏤𓆱𓈖𓋹𓈖(cid:0)𓐍,
and sat
with the great gods by the side of the Great Lake in the Field of
Peace, their bread and drink never grew stale, they neither thirsted
nor hungered, and they enjoyed celestial figs and wine. In one
portion of the kingdom of Osiris the blessed cultivated the divine
plant Maāt, whereon both they and Osiris lived, and eating the same
food they became one with him, and shared with him his attributes
of divinity, incorruptibility, and immortality.

The holy Ape-gods singing The Jackal-gods and the
hymns of praise to Rā at Hawk-gods singing hymns of
sunrise. praise to Rā at sunset.
The wicked who were in the Other World consisted of two
classes: 1. The enemies of Rā, the Sun-god. 2. The enemies of
Osiris, i. e., the souls of sinful men and women. The former were
gathered together each night and did their utmost to prevent the
sun rising morning by morning, but they were always seized by the
angels of Rā and dragged by them to the eastern portion of the sky,
where they were cast into the fiery caldrons of the god and
consumed in their flames. The heavy mists and clouds of the
morning represented the smoke of these caldrons, and the red glare
of dawn was the reflection of their flames. Opinions differed as to
the way in which the enemies of Osiris were disposed of. According
to some, those who were condemned in the Judgment were
devoured by the monster Ām-mit, the “Eater of the Dead”; but
others held that they were dragged to the divine block of doom 𓌩,
where they were beheaded by the headsman of Osiris, called
Shesmu
𓈚(cid:0)𓊃𓅓𓅱𓀭.
Sometimes their bodies were hacked limb
from limb by him, and sometimes they were seized upon by the
“Watchers,” who “carry slaughtering knives, and have cruel fingers,”
and cut the dead into pieces, which were thrown down into pits of
fire, or into the great Lake of Fire. Here at one corner sat a monster
who swallowed hearts and ate up the dead, himself remaining
invisible; his name was “Devourer for millions of years.”
The judgment of souls took place at midnight, and the
righteous were rewarded, and the condemned punished before a
new day began. The souls of all those who had died during the day
were judged that day, and their cases disposed of finally; eternal
happiness was decreed for the blessed, and annihilation, not
everlasting punishment, for the wicked. In late times there are
passages in the texts which suggest that certain souls who set out
from this world for the kingdom of Osiris failed to reach it, either
because the amulets which were buried with their bodies were not

sufficiently powerful, or because their offerings to the gods were too
few when they were on earth. There is no evidence that such souls
were believed to suffer, or that the portion of the Other World
beyond which they had been unable to proceed was a sort of
purgatory. They dwelt in darkness during the greater part of each
day, but the Sun-god passed among them each night, and spake
words on which they lived until the next night; when he departed
they wept as the doors of their abode closed on them, and shut him
from their sight.
The views of the Egyptians about the position of heaven
PET
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇯,
and the Other World changed in different periods.
In the earliest times heaven was believed to be situated above the
large, flat rectangular slab of iron (or alabaster?) which formed the
sky. This slab was supported on four pillars, which were kept in
position and presided over by the four sons of Horus, Mesthȧ, Ḥāpi,
Ṭuamutef, and Qebḥsennuf. These four gods sat on pillars, which,
subsequently, were regarded as the four cardinal points. The
stars were believed to be hung from the slab by hooks through
(cid:0)
holes,, like lamps from a ceiling. The righteous ascended to this
heaven by means of a ladder. Osiris himself was obliged to use a
ladder, and Horus and Set held each one side of the ladder [glyph
not in Unicode], and assisted him to mount with their fingers. The
models of ladders and of the two forefingers which are found in
tombs commemorate this event.
The name given to the Other World was Ṭuat
𓇼𓄿𓏏(cid:0)𓉐.
This
region was not under the earth, or deep in it, but ran parallel with
Egypt, which formed one side of it. A river flowed through the whole
length of it. On the other side of the river was a range of mountains,
and outside this was the great celestial ocean which surrounded the
world. The Ṭuat was a valley which in the XIXth dynasty was
believed to begin near Thebes, at Manu, the Mountain of Sunset,
and, stretching northwards as far as Saïs, bent round towards the
east until it reached the region of Ȧnnu (On), when it turned to the

south and continued until it ended at Bakhet, the Mountain of
Sunrise. The Ṭuat was divided into ten sections, and had a vestibule
at each end of it, and in the XIXth dynasty it included the local
kingdoms of the dead of Thebes, Abydos, Herakleopolis, Memphis,
Saïs, Bubastis, and Ȧnnu. Each section was guarded by a massive
gate, with battlements, but its door flew open before the Sun-god as
he traversed the Ṭuat nightly in his boat. According to one legend
there was a small passage at Abydos called “Peka,” i. e., the Gap,
which connected this world with the Ṭuat; and according to another
there was a similar passage at Thebes. Be this as it may, the souls of
all those who had died during the day assembled in the passage
each evening and endeavoured to obtain a seat in the solar bark as
the god passed by. In its passage the boat passed the kingdom of
Osiris; those who preferred a material heaven disembarked at that
spot, and those who desired to become like Rā and to be with him
remained in their places in the boat. For all souls, however, there
was an examination of their credentials, and those who were not
provided with amulets, and with formulas and words of power, were
ejected.
Recognition of Friends.—From the statements made in papyri
and on coffins there is no doubt that the Egyptians believed that
they would know and recognize each other in the Other World, and
would enjoy intercourse with their relatives and friends. In the
Papyrus of Ȧnhai (.. 1040), we see this lady meeting her father
B C
and mother in the Sekhet-ḥetep, or Elysian Fields, and sailing with
her husband in a boat on one of the canals; in the Papyrus of Ani
(.. 1500) we see the deceased seated with his wife Thuthu playing
B C
draughts; and the scribe Nebseni (.. 1550) says: “I have seen the
B C
Osiris (i. e., his father), and I have recognized my mother.” In the
Book of the Dead (Chapter LII) the deceased prays: “May my
ancestors, and my father and mother be given unto me as guardians
of my door, and for the ordering of my territory,” and in Chapter
LXVIII he declares that he shall have authority over his workmen
and workwomen just as he had upon earth. On a coffin of the XIth
dynasty (.. 2600) at Cairo the gods Rā, Tem, Seb, and Nut are
B C

implored to grant the “gathering together of the ancestors and
kinsfolk of Sepȧ in the Other World,” in the following words: “Let him
traverse heaven, and earth, and the waters, let him meet his
ancestors, and his father, and his mother, and his sons and
daughters, and his brethren and his sisters, and his friends both
male and female, and those who have been as parents to him (i. e.,
uncles and aunts), and his kinsfolk (i. e., cousins or connexions), and
those who have worked for him on earth, both male and female, and
[22]
the woman whom he hath loved and known.” In the second
portion of the text it is declared that all these shall come forth to
meet Sepȧ on his arrival in the Other World, and that they shall bear
in their hands their staves, and their mattocks, and their
ploughshares, and their clubs, so that in the event of any attack
being made upon him by any hostile god, they may deliver their
kinsman forthwith.
The use of amulets played a very large part in the Egyptian
religion. They were generally made of stones and other materials
believed to possess magical properties, which their wearers were
supposed to acquire. A fine collection of Egyptian amulets is
exhibited in the Fourth Egyptian Room (Table-case F), where
examples of every authorized shape and kind will be found. In
connexion with these the unrivalled collection of scarabs should
be examined (Table-cases D, E, G, I).

Flint amulets of the Predynastic Period.
The Oryx. The Crocodile. A Fish. Hippopotamus.
[See Table-case M, Third Egyptian Room.]
The following are the principal amulets mentioned in funerary
texts or found in tombs with, or on, the bodies of the dead: The
scarab, or beetle, kheprer
𓆣𓂋(cid:0)𓂋𓅬,
was the symbol of the god
Kheperȧ, and represented generation, new life, virility, and
resurrection. The Heart, ȧb 𓄣, symbol of the seat of life in the
bodies of gods, animals, and men, and emblem of the conscience; it
brought to the wearer the protection of both Osiris and Rā. The
heart was associated with the scarab, and the same ḥekau, or words
of power, were written on both. The importance of this amulet is
shown by the fact that in the Book of the Dead six chapters are
devoted to formulas for the protection of the heart. The Girdle of
Isis, thet 𓎬, assured the wearer of the divine protection of the holy
blood of the goddess. The Ṭeṭ 𓊽, a fetish, the original significance of
which is unknown. In later times it symbolized the tree trunk in
which the body of Osiris was hidden by Isis, and also the upright,
consolidated back-bone of the god. Its general meaning is stability.
The Pillow 𓊫 typified the raising up and preservation of the head.
The Vulture 𓅐 brought with it the protection of the great “Mother”
(cid:0)
Isis. The Collar gave strength and power to the breast, heart,
and lungs, and symbolized the dominion of the wearer over all
Egypt. The Papyrus Sceptre 𓇅 represented the strength, vigour,
and virility of youth, and abundance of every kind.
(cid:0)
The human-headed Hawk ensured to the deceased the
power of uniting his body, soul and spirit at will. The Ladder [glyph
not in Unicode] symbolized the ladder by which Osiris ascended from
the earth to heaven. Models of this were buried with the dead in the
tombs, and when the deceased needed a ladder he uttered the
Chapter of the Ladder, and the model ladder became as long as he
wanted. The Two Fingers [glyph not in Unicode] index and medius,

represent the fingers which Horus used when he helped his father
Osiris up the ladder which reached from earth to heaven.
The Utchat 𓂀 typified the strength and power of the Eye of
Horus, or Rā, i. e., the Sun-god, the two eyes
(cid:0)(cid:0)𓂀
gave to the
wearer the strength and protection both of the Sun and Moon. The
Ānkh 𓋹, or symbol of “life.” What object this amulet represented is
unknown. The Nefer 𓄤, or lute, signified “happiness, good luck,” etc.
(cid:0)
The Serpent’s Head protected its wearer when alive against
snake bite, and when dead against the attacks of worms and
serpents in the tomb. The Menȧt 𓋧 represented nutrition, and the
union of the male and female powers of nature, generation, etc. The
Sma 𓄥 symbolized animal pleasure. The Shen 𓍶 was the emblem of
the orbit of the sun in heaven. King Besh, of the IInd dynasty, wrote
his name within this circle, which in an elongated form 𓍷 became
the cartouche of the later kings. The shen was the symbol of the
eternal protection of the name by Rā.
The Steps 𓊍 symbolized the throne of Osiris, and procured for the
(cid:0)
wearer “exaltation” to and in heaven. The Plumes symbolized
Isis and Nephthys, who had their seat on the forehead of Rā, and
the Maāti goddesses, or goddesses of Right and Truth. The Frog 𓆏
was typical of teeming life and the resurrection. It was the symbol of
the goddess Ḥeqt, the wife of Khnemu, who made the first man on a
potter’s wheel, and when laid on a dead person transferred to him
the new life which was in the body of the goddess. The Pesesh-Kef
(cid:0)
suggests the idea of second birth in connexion with the
ceremonies of Opening the Mouth. The mouth of the mummy, or of
a statue, was touched with this amulet, or instrument, whilst the
priest recited words of power; as a result of that the mouth was
“opened,” i. e., the deceased could henceforth talk, think, walk, eat,
drink, etc., in the Other World. A fine example of this amulet in flint
(Table-case M, Third Egyptian Room) of the Neolithic Period proves

that the idea of “opening the mouth” is older than the dynasties of
Egypt. The Solar Disk on the horizon 𓈌 symbolizes life which
renews itself, resurrection, virility, strength, etc. The Neterui
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0), or 𓊹𓊹, represent the two iron instruments used in the
ceremony of “opening the mouth”; their presence among the
swathings of the mummy, or in the tomb, secured for the deceased
the protection of the gods of the South and the North.
On rare occasions all the amulets mentioned above have been
found in one tomb, or on a single body. A good example of a
collection of amulets found on a single body is No. 4 (Table-case K,
Fourth Egyptian Room). Here will be seen uraei, the menȧt, the
utchat, the scarab, the shen, the triad of Isis, Nephthys, and
Harpokrates: the papyrus sceptre, the heart, the plumes, the two
fingers, ṭeṭs, etc.; the places on the body on which they were found
are indicated by the labels. Another class of amulets is represented
by the figures of gods, goddesses, and sacred animals, which were
either worn as pendants to necklaces, etc., during life, or placed
among the swathings of the mummified body. Of these the British
Museum possesses very large collections, and the finest examples of
them will be found in Wall-cases Nos. 119-132, in the Third Egyptian
Room. A very remarkable group of amulets or objects, which were
intended to give protection to the tomb of the priestess for whom
they were made, is exhibited in the Second Egyptian Room (Wall-
case No. 73). It consists of a Ṭeṭ 𓊽, a human figure 𓀾, a jackal 𓃣,
and a reed, and each object stands on a small inscribed brick of Nile
mud. The ceremony in which these were used is described in the
Book of the Dead (Chapter CXXXVII). The text is only found in the
Papyrus of Nu (No. 10,477), and the group of objects which
illustrates it appears to be unique.
In connexion with the numerous ceremonies which found a
prominent place in the cult of Osiris must be mentioned two classes
of magical figures. It has already been said that the righteous who
lived in the kingdom of Osiris were employed in the cultivation of the
Maāt wheat, on which both they and Osiris lived. Now, before this

wheat could be grown, it was assumed that the land of the celestial
fields had to be prepared and watered, and renewed with top-
dressing, just like the fields on earth. These laborious agricultural
works were performed by a celestial corvée, which was under the
general control of the “Ḥenbiu,” or gods of the Celestial Domain
Lands. These gods provided estates for the blessed, and carefully
watched the land measurers to see that they carried out their
orders. They also provided gangs of beings to work these fields, and
set taskmasters (Tchatchaiu) and time-keepers (Kheru āḥāu) over
them, so that they might make them toil their appointed time. Why
these beings were condemned to forced labour cannot be explained,
for not a word is said which would suggest that they were sinners,
and that their work was a punishment. The Egyptian theologians
appear to have been incapable of conceiving a heaven in which
there was no corvée to perform menial tasks, and equally incapable
of imagining the existence of a corvée which did not need the
constant supervision of time-keepers and gangers.
Be this as it may, the Egyptians, as a people, hated forced labour,
and the priests found a way for them to escape from it. The means
[23]
chosen was the Shabti, or Ushabti figure. The meaning of the
word Ushabti is unknown. Some associate the name with that of the
persea tree (shab, or shabt), but others connect it with the word
ushab, “to answer,” and think the figure was called Ushabti,
because in the text cut upon it the figure “answers” and says: “Verily
I am there,” etc. The Ushabti figure was a figure made of wood,
stone, porcelain, metal, etc., which was intended to represent the
person on whose behalf it was fashioned, and it was supposed to
carry a digging tool and a basket in which to remove earth or sand
from one place to another. In short, the Ushabti figure is a model of
a farm labourer or fallâḥ. On the figure it was customary to cut a
formula which was supposed to be said by the deceased in the Other
World, to this effect: “In the event of my being condemned to
spread dust (i. e., sebakh or top-dressing) on the fields in the Ṭuat,
or to fill the water-courses with water from the river, or to reap the
harvest, such work shall be performed for me by thee, and no

obstacle shall be put in thy way.” Below this formula were cut the
words with which the figure was supposed to answer: “Verily I am
there, wheresoever thou mayest speak” (or call me). When the
deceased found himself in the Other World, and condemned to work
in the celestial corvée, he was supposed to utter the words rendered
above, and if they had been spoken in a correct tone of voice, the
figure would change into a full-grown man, who was provided with a
digging tool and basket, and who was capable of performing field
labours.
The dread of forced labour in the minds of the Egyptians resulted
in the production of the immense numbers of Ushabti figures which
are seen in all great museums. The number found in some tombs is
very large; thus, Seti I caused 700 to be buried with him, and, at the
present time, there are 149 figures in the Ushabti-box of Ānkh-f-en-
Khensu in Wall-case 116, in the Third Egyptian Room. The collection
of Ushabti figures in the British Museum (Second Egyptian Room) is
unrivalled, and contains fine specimens of every period from about.. 2600 to.. 600. Worthy of note are the limestone figure of
B C B C
Ȧāḥmes I, the fine diorite figure of king Ȧmen-ḥetep II, the granite
figure of Ȧmen-ḥetep III, the porcelain and wooden figures of Seti I,
and the figures of Rameses III, Rameses V, Psammetichus I, and
Uaḥ-ȧb-Rā (Pharaoh Ḥophra).
Other figures which were highly esteemed as possessing magical
powers were those to which the name of Ptaḥ-Seker-Ȧsȧr, or Ptaḥ-
Socharis-Osiris, has been given (see Second Egyptian Room, Wall-
cases 89-92). Ptaḥ was the creator of the world, according to the
doctrine of Memphis; Seker was the god of the Other World of
Memphis; and Ȧsȧr, or Osiris, has already been discussed; these
three gods were united in the later theology, and the resultant god
was regarded as the lord of Heaven, Earth, and the Other World.
Figures of this triune god were made of wood, painted or gilded, and
fixed on a rectangular stand, in which two cavities were usually
hollowed out, one in front of the figure and one at one side. In the
cavity in front a little piece of the body of the deceased was placed,

and a cover was fitted over it, with a figure of the hawk of Seker 𓅌
upon it; in the cavity in the side of the pedestal a small roll of
papyrus inscribed with prayers was inserted. The figure and pedestal
were often inscribed with formulas in which the triune god Ptaḥ-
Seker-Ȧsȧr was invoked, and it was believed that so long as the
portion of the dead body that was in the pedestal of the figure was
preserved, the body in the tomb would be kept in its integrity and
everlasting life would be assured for the soul. Typical examples of
these figures are Nos. 9870 and 9736 (Wall-cases 90 and 91, Second
Egyptian Room). Originally the figure on the pedestal was that of
Osiris himself, standing upon the symbol of Maāt, or Truth 𓐙; a
good example is No. 20,868, which is hollow; it contained the fine
copy of the Book of the Dead of the priestess Ȧnhai, which is in the
British Museum (No. 10,472, Wall-case 90, Second Egyptian Room).
We have already seen that, after the murder and mutilation of the
body of Osiris, the Man-god of the primitive Egyptians, by Set, the
god of evil, Horus the son of Osiris, assisted by a number of beings
who are called the Followers of Horus, performed a number of
magical ceremonies, whereby the rejoining of the limbs of the god
was effected, and the preservation of his body was secured for ever.
The Egyptians argued: Certain ceremonies were performed by Horus
on the dead body of Osiris, and he was mummified, and as a result
he rose from the dead; we therefore will have the ceremonies which
were performed over Osiris performed over our dead bodies, which
shall be mummified, as was the body of Osiris, and we also shall rise
from the dead. Every Egyptian from the time of the IVth dynasty,
about.. 3600, believed that his existence in the Other World
B C
depended upon the mummification of his body in this world, and
during his lifetime he made provision for his embalmment, and,
when his means permitted, prepared a tomb in which his mummified
body should be placed. Now the Egyptian had several reasons for
mummifying the dead: 1. He wished the souls of the dead to enjoy
everlasting life. 2. He wished to maintain dwelling places for the Kau
or “doubles” of the dead, so that they might not be obliged to
wander about in the deserts in search of food. 3. He wished the

dead to form a bond of union between the gods and himself. 4. He
believed that the soul came back to the body from time to time. 5.
He believed in the resurrection of the material body itself, and that
at some future time it would be united to its soul for all eternity. This
last was the chief reason why he preserved the body with spices,
unguents, bitumen, etc., and, in spite of the very high state of
civilization to which the Egyptians attained, the belief in the supreme
importance of mummification was never wholly eradicated from the
minds of ordinary folk, even after they had embraced Christianity.
In the most primitive times the dead were mutilated to prevent
their returning to their native places to live upon the food needed for
the living, but in the Dynastic Period the utmost care was taken to
prevent the mutilation of the body, and to preserve it from
destruction caused by damp, dry rot, or worms. The texts state
plainly that after the resurrection the body was to live upon earth,
whilst the soul dwelt in heaven. In the Vth dynasty it was written:
“The soul belongeth to heaven, and the body to earth,” and in the
VIth dynasty it is said to king Pepi: “Thy essence belongeth to
heaven, and thy body belongeth to earth.” The same idea occurs in
all dynasties down to the Ptolemaïc Period, when we find in the
“Lamentations of Isis” the words addressed to the deceased, who is
identified with Osiris: “Heaven hath thy soul, and earth hath thy
body.”
Before an account of the process of mummification is given, it will
be well to note briefly the views which the Egyptians held as to the
relationship of the component parts of the material and spiritual
man. Most peoples have divided man into three parts, body, soul,
and spirit; but the Egyptian system of the human economy was
more complex. The material part of a man was the khat
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0), or body. Through mummification, and the prayers
which were recited over it after that process, the body obtained a
degree of knowledge, and power, and glory, whereby it became
henceforth lasting and incorruptible. This glorified body was called
a Sāḥu
𓊃(cid:0)𓂝𓎛𓅱𓋩.
When a man was born into the world there was

also born with him an abstract individuality, or personality, which
remained with him all the days of his life, and could only be
separated permanently from him by death. To this personality is
given the name Ka
𓂓(cid:0)𓏤,
a word which has been translated by
“double, genius, image, character, person, self,” etc.
When the Ka left the body at death it was necessary for the living
to find a habitation, and to provide meat, and drink, and shelter for
it. Otherwise it would be obliged to wander about in search of food,
and if it failed to find it, would return and wreak vengeance on the
living. Provision was therefore made for the Ka in the tomb of the
dead person of whom it had once formed a part. First a statue was
made in stone, or wood, and fashioned to represent the deceased.
Over this a long series of ceremonies was performed, and at the end
of them the deceased was declared to have obtained the powers of
talking, thinking, walking, etc., and the statue was supposed to be in
a fit state to receive the Ka should it be pleased to enter into it and
dwell there. A special chamber was set apart in the tomb for the
statue, and through an opening in one of the walls which
communicated with the hall of the tomb wherein the offerings were
made, the Ka inhabiting this statue was able to enjoy the smell of
the incense, meat, wine, and other offerings. It had power to leave
the statue and to wander about at will on earth and in the Other
World; and there are suggestions in the texts that it might take up
its abode in the body of a living man from which his Ka had
temporarily gone forth for some purpose of its own.
With the Ka was closely connected the Ȧb
𓄣(cid:0)𓏤,
or heart, which
was regarded as the seat of life and the source of the emotions; it
possessed two phases, one material and the other spiritual. It
corresponds with the “dual soul” of many tribes in the Sûdân at the
present day. The spiritual heart could be stolen from a man by the
exercise of magical powers; and this belief survives among certain
peoples in Central Africa at the present day. Another attribute of a
man was the Sekhem 𓋴𓐍𓅓𓌂, or vital power, which was intimately
connected with the Ka, and seems to have possessed a form similar

to it. The mental and spiritual attributes of man were grouped in the
Khu 𓐍𓅜𓅱, the exact meaning of which it is very hard to define. The
Khu seems to have been a shining, translucent, transparent,
intangible essence of a man, and the word is on the whole perhaps
best rendered by spirit. The Khu escaped from the tomb and made
its way to heaven, where it joined the “imperishable spirits” who
lived with Rā. It is probable that the Sāḥu, Ȧb, Sekhem, and Khu
were all attributes of the Ka.
That part of a man which was, beyond all doubt, believed to be
everlasting and to enjoy eternal existence in heaven in a state of
glory, was the Ba
𓅡(cid:0)𓏤,
or soul; it was associated with the Ka, and,
like the heart, appears to have possessed a dual nature. It could live
in a state of invisibility, and yet could take form at pleasure; it is
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
often depicted as a human-headed hawk,. The object of all
the ceremonies which were performed over the mummy or the
statue in the tomb was to bring back the soul from heaven to the
body in which it dwelt on earth, and when the priest told the kinsfolk
of the deceased that “Horus had recovered his eye,” i. e., that the
soul had returned to the body, they felt that everlasting life and
happiness were secured for him. The souls of the blessed lived with
the “spirits” in the heaven of Rā, and when they appeared in the sky
they did so under the form of stars.
The soul was usually accompanied by the Khaibit
𓋼(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓏏,
or
shadow, which may be compared with the σκία of the Greeks, and
the umbra of the Romans. It had an independent existence, and was
able to separate itself from the body at will, but hostile fiends might
attack it, and therefore the deceased prays in the Book of the Dead
(Chapter XCII): “Let not be shut in my soul, let not be fettered my
shadow, let a way be opened for my soul and for my shadow, and
let them see the Great God.” It is very difficult to know where the
functions of each of these parts of a man began and ended, for even
the Egyptians became confused in dealing with them, and the texts
often contradict each other. The main facts are, however, quite clear.
The Egyptians believed in the existence of body, double, spirit, soul,

and shadow, at all periods, and the views which they held about
each are best understood by reference to the religious beliefs which
exist at the present time among the A-Zandê, or Nyam-Nyam, the
Bantu, the Mañbattu, and cognate tribes in Central Africa. Under the
influence of foreigners the primitive views became modified as time
went on, but in all essentials the Egyptians who served under the
Romans believed what their ancestors believed 5,000 years before.

CHAPTER VIII.
E. T E T.
MBALMING HE GYPTIAN OMB
Mummy is the name given to the body of a human being, or
creature, which has been preserved from decay by means of spices,
gums, natron, bitumen, etc.; strictly speaking it should only be given
to the body preserved by bitumen, for “mummy” is derived from a
word which appears in Arabic under the form mûmîâ, and means
“bitumen.” The oldest preserved bodies known were prepared with
salt and soda, and bitumen was certainly not used on a large scale
for embalming purposes before the XXIInd dynasty, about.. 900.
B C
The embalmed body, swathed in linen, was called by the Egyptians
qes
𓈎(cid:0)𓊃𓀾, 𓈎(cid:0)𓊃𓌟𓍱,
or qesȧu
𓈎(cid:0)𓊃𓇋𓅱(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)𓍱,
which has passed
into Coptic under the form kôs. The word “mummy” is not of
Egyptian origin.
In the latter part of the Neolithic Period the Egyptians, in some
places at least, decapitated and dismembered the dead, but
subsequently, probably as a result of change in religious thought,
they took steps to preserve them. At first bodies were merely dried
in the sun, and then placed in a hole in the ground, in a sitting
position, just as they are to this day by the A-Zandê; later they were
laid on one side, with the legs bent upwards, and their knees near
the chin. Evisceration of some kind appears to have been practised,
but not of a very elaborate character. The finest and most complete
example of the class of preserved bodies which were buried in a
crouching position is exhibited in the First Egyptian Room, Case A.
Here we see, lying on his left side, a Predynastic Egyptian, with hair
of a reddish tint; the knees are bent to a level with the top of the
breast, and the hands are placed before the face. He was
dolichocephalic, or long-headed, and he was both physically and

mentally entirely different from the Dynastic Egyptians, whose skulls,
in respect of measurements, occupy a middle position between the
dolichocephalic and the brachycephalic, or short-headed. Round
about the body are vessels which held food, flint weapons, etc. At
this period the body was sometimes wrapped in the skin of some
animal, or rolled up in a reed mat.
Soon after the beginning of the Dynastic Period, probably as the
result of the growth and development of the cult of Osiris, the
Egyptians began to devote more care to the preservation of the
bodies of the dead, and the earliest known examples prove that the
brain and viscerae were removed, and that the placing of bodies in a
crouching position in graves was abandoned, at all events among
the ruling classes. The doctrine of Osiris taught that the human body
was a precious thing, and men took care to embalm it and swathe it
in linen, so that it might be ready for the return of the soul to it,
when it would begin a new life in the kingdom of Osiris.
The Egyptian texts supply no details of the methods employed in
embalmment, but classical writers describe the processes at some
length, and the mummies which have been unrolled and examined
prove that their statements are on the whole correct. According to
Herodotus (ii, 85) there were three methods of embalming in
use in his time. In the first or most expensive way, the brains and
viscerae were removed from the body, which was carefully washed
with palm wine, and then sprinkled with powdered spices. The
cavities in the head and body were next filled with pounded myrrh,
cassia, etc., and the opening in the abdomen through which the
viscerae were taken out was sewed up. A tank containing a solution
of salt, or soda, was prepared, and the body was steeped in it for
seventy days. At the end of this period it was taken out of the
solution, dried, and anointed with sweet-smelling unguents; then the
swathing with linen strips was begun. Sometimes, in the case of
women, the cheeks and lips were painted, the eye-lids smeared with
eye-paint, and other attempts made to give to the face the
semblance of life before swathing. The fingers and toes were each
swathed separately, then the legs and arms, and finally, when pads

and wads of linen had been fixed in various places to keep the
swathings in position, and to give to the mummy the traditional form
of the mummy of Osiris, the body and head were wrapped up in
large sheets of linen, which were held in place by stout bands. As
each swathing was placed on the body, a priest who was specially
appointed said the formula which applied to it, and in cases where a
large number of amulets were used, these objects, which were
intended to give to the mummy the protection of the various gods,
were inserted, under his directions, in their proper places between
the swathings. When the swathing of the body was ended, the name
of the deceased was usually written in ink on one of the outer
coverings.
In the second method of embalming, the viscerae were removed
by means of oil of cedar, and the flesh was dissolved off the bones
by a preparation of soda; mummies which were prepared by this
process consist of nothing but skin and bone. The third method
was used almost exclusively for the poor; the body was steeped in a
preparation of soda for a period of seventy days, and then handed
over to the relatives for burial. The period which elapsed between
death and burial varied in length. From the inscriptions we learn that
in one case the embalming lasted 16 days, the swathing in linen 35
days, and the burial 70 days, i. e., 121 days in all. In another, the
embalming occupied 66 days, the preparations for burial 4 days, and
the burial 26 days, in all 96 days. According to the Bible (Genesis l,
3), the embalming of Jacob occupied 40 days, but the period of
[24]
mourning was 70 days. Certain stelae in the British Museum
mention 70 days, and we may assume that this period was
commonly observed, at all events, in Graeco-Roman times.
Cost of embalming.—According to Diodorus, who lived about.. 40, the methods of embalming were three in number; the first
B C
cost one talent of silver, about £250; the second, twenty minae,
about £60; and the third very little indeed. In the description of the
first method given both by Herodotus and Diodorus, it is said that
the intestines were removed from the body previous to embalming,

but neither writer says what was done with them afterwards. We
know, however, that they were cleansed, and wrapped in linen with
powdered spices, salt, etc., and placed in a series of four jars, or
vases, to which modern writers have given the name Canopic Jars.
They were thus named by the early Egyptologists, who believed that
in them they saw some confirmation of the legend handed down by
certain ancient writers to the effect that Canopus, the pilot of
Menelaus, who is said to have been buried at Canopus, in Egypt,
was worshipped there under the form of a jar with small feet, a thin
neck, a swollen body, and a round back. Each “Canopic” jar was
dedicated to one of the four sons of Horus, or sons of Osiris, who
were also the gods of the four cardinal points; and each jar was
provided with a lid made in the shape of the head of the deity to
whom it was dedicated. The names of the four gods were:—
1. Mesthȧ 𓅓𓋴𓍘𓇋𓀭, or Ȧ 𓇋𓅓𓋴𓏏𓀭; he was man-headed.
MSET
2. Ḥāpi 𓐑𓊪𓇌𓀭; he was dog-headed.
3. Ṭuamutef
𓇼𓅐𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓀭;
he was jackal-headed.
4. Qebḥsennuf 𓈎𓃀𓎛𓏁𓈗𓌣𓌣𓌣𓆑𓀭; he was hawk-headed.
These gods represented the south, north, east, and west
respectively, and the goddesses with whom they were associated
were Isis, Nephthys, Neith, and Serqet. Mesthȧ protected the
stomach and large intestines; Ḥāpi, the small intestines; Ṭuamutef
the lungs and heart; and Qebḥsennuf the liver and gall bladder. The
custom of mummifying the intestines separately is as old as the VIth
dynasty at least, and the gods of the cardinal points who presided
over them are mentioned several times in the texts of Unȧs, Pepi,
and other kings of the Vth and VIth dynasties. The four jars were
usually placed in a coffer, or chest, specially prepared for the
purpose; and this is frequently depicted in representations of funeral
processions. The Ani Papyrus shows the four sons of Horus standing
by the coffer containing the mummified intestines of the deceased,

and his renewed body rising through the cover of it, holding “life” 𓋹
in each hand (see page 138). Among the fine collection of “Canopic”
jars in the British Museum may be specially mentioned the set made
for Ḳua-ṭep, XIth dynasty, No. 30,838 (Third Egyptian Room, Wall-
case No. 112), and the sets Nos. 22,374-7, and 9562-5, of the later
period, in Wall-cases Nos. 74 and 75 (Second Egyptian Room).
The custom of mummifying the dead appears to have been
unknown in the Predynastic Period. In the earliest attempts made to
preserve the body, the plan followed was to remove the intestines,
and then to dry it in the sun, or to rub it with salt. The skulls found
in the tombs are usually empty, a fact which proves that the
embalmers were able to remove the brain and membranes without
injury to the bridge of the nose; sometimes they contain bitumen, or
some kind of resin, which must have been introduced into them by
the way through which the brains were extracted, i. e., through the
nostrils. Mummies cured with unguents and spices do not last long
when unrolled; the skin of those cured with natron, i. e., a mixture of
carbonate, sulphate, and muriate of soda, is hard, and comparatively
durable, but it hangs loosely from the bones, which are white and
somewhat friable; bodies from which the intestines have been
removed, and which have been preserved by being filled with
bitumen, are quite black and hard, and practically speaking, last for
ever. The dead poor were sometimes merely salted and laid in a
common pit or cave. At one period the dead were embalmed in
honey: the treatment of the child who was found in a sealed jar of
honey, mentioned by the Muḥammadan writer ʿAbd al-Laṭîf, and the
body of Alexander the Great being well-known instances of the
custom.
Under, or soon after the XXVIth dynasty, the Egyptians began to
place their mummified dead in brightly painted cartonnage cases,
decorated with inscriptions containing the pedigree of the deceased,
religious texts, figures of gods, etc., and to set them upright in the
halls of their houses. The faces were painted to resemble those of
the dead, and attempts were made to reproduce the natural colour

of their skins, hair, and eyes, and even to represent small physical
peculiarities. A man’s immediate ancestors formed a part of his
household.
About the beginning of the Graeco-Roman Period, or in the first
century after Christ, it became the custom among the ruling class in
Egypt to insert painted portraits of the dead in the linen
swathings over their faces. Specimens of such portraits may be seen
in Case Y in the Second Egyptian Room, and in Wall-cases Nos. 70
and 71. A century or two later further attempts were made to
abolish from mummies the funerary swathings, etc., and the dead
were placed in papyrus cases, which were moulded to their forms,
and were painted with coloured representations of their clothes and
ornaments. Very fine examples of such painted papyrus cases are
exhibited in Wall-cases 64 and 65 in the First Egyptian Room, and
they are of special interest as showing what kinds of garments and
jewellery were worn by the Graeco-Egyptian ladies of Egypt, and
how they were decorated. In the case of men, painted portraits were
inserted over the faces, and the rest of the mummy was covered
with plaster, usually coloured pink or red, and ornamented with
faulty imitations of the scenes found on the old cartonnage cases.
The best example of this kind of mummy is that of Artemidorus,
exhibited in Wall-case 63 in the First Egyptian Room. The figures of
the gods, etc., are painted in gold, and the mistakes in them prove
that the artist did not understand the signification of the scenes
which he was copying. The old theology of Egypt was forgotten, the
meanings of the old funerary texts and scenes were lost, and the
artist found himself obliged to use the form of address to the dead
customary among the Greeks, i. e., “O Artemidorus, farewell!”
The Egyptians, even after their conversion to Christianity,
continued for a time to mummify their dead, and to bury them with
the old ceremonies; but before the end of the third century.. the
A D
art of embalmment had fallen into general disuse. The pagan
Egyptian embalmed his dead because he believed that the “perfect
soul” would return to the body after death, and that it would enter
upon a new life in it; he therefore took pains to preserve the body

against the corruption of the grave. The Christian Egyptian believed
that at the Resurrection he would receive back his body, changed
and incorruptible, and that it was unnecessary for him to preserve by
means of spices and unguents that which he would obtain, without
any trouble on his part, by faith through Christ. Little by little, as a
result of this belief, the observance of the old pagan ceremonies
ceased, and with them embalmment in the Egyptian fashion. The
views which Anthony the “Father of the Monks of the Egyptian
desert” (.. 250-355), held on this matter are of importance.
A D
According to Athanasius: “The Egyptians were in the habit of taking
the dead bodies of righteous men, and especially those of the
blessed martyrs, and of embalming them and placing them, not in
graves, but on biers in their houses, for they thought that by so
doing they were paying honour to them.” Anthony besought the
Bishops to preach to the people, and to command them to cease
from this habit, and he showed “That it was a transgression of a
command for a man not to hide in the ground the bodies of those
who were dead, even though they were righteous men. Therefore
many hearkened and were persuaded not to do so, and they laid
their dead in the ground, and buried them therein.” When he was
dying he entreated his monks, saying: “Permit no man to take my
body and carry it into Egypt, lest according to the custom which they
have, they embalm me and lay me up in their houses.... And ye
know that I have continually made exhortation concerning this thing
and begged that it should not be done, and ye well know how much
I have blamed those who observed this custom. Dig a grave then,
and bury me therein, and hide my body under the earth, and let
these my words be observed carefully by you, and tell ye no man
where ye lay me until the Resurrection of the Dead, when I shall
receive this body without corruption from the Saviour.” (See The Life
of Anthony, by Athanasius, in Migne Patrologiae, Ser. Graec., tom.
XXVI, col. 972.)
The linen mummy swathings must now be mentioned. These
were made from flax, and were of various thicknesses. Surviving
examples vary in length from a few inches to about 15 feet, and in

width from 2 to 10 inches; some are made with fringe at each end.
Mummies are often found wrapped in linen sheets, several feet
square, and the outside covering of all is sometimes of a purple or
salmon colour. Under the Ancient Empire, mummy swathings were
quite plain, but under the Middle Empire, blue stripes occasionally
appear at the ends, and the sheets in which the mummies of kings
were wrapped, e. g., Ȧmenḥetep III and Thothmes III, were covered
with hieroglyphic texts from the Book of the Dead. At a later period
texts in the hieratic character appear on the swathings, accompanied
by vignettes drawn in outline. The principal seat of the linen industry
in Egypt was Panopolis, the modern Akhmîm, and, at a very early
period, the weavers attained to such skill, that in a square inch 540
threads may be counted in the warp and 110 in the woof. About the
third century of our era, the mummies of wealthy people were
wrapped in “royal cloth” made wholly of silk and decorated with
figures of gods, animals, etc. The visitor will find a large collection of
mummy swathings and sheets exhibited in Table-case E, in the Third
Egyptian Room. Here are the fringed linen winding-sheet of
Teḥuti-sat, a singing woman of Queen Ȧāḥmes-nefert-ȧri,.. 1550
B C
(No. 1); two swathings inscribed with texts from the Book of the
Dead (Nos. 11, 12); a roll of linen inscribed with the names of
Piānkhi Seneferef-Rā,.. 700 (No. 13); grave shirts from Akhmîm
B C
(Nos. 18-27); and specimens of embroidered linen, with figures of
saints, etc. (No. 39 ff.); a portion of a Coptic stole embroidered
with scenes from the life of Christ, and squares of linen worked with
coloured figures of birds (doves?), and the Cross and symbol of “life”
𓋹 within wreaths (Nos. 40-51).
In the same case is a good general collection of reels, spindles
and spindle whorls, and carding instruments, etc., used by workers
in linen. In Table-case J is a fine collection of pieces of linen
ornamented with patterns and designs woven in coloured threads, or
worked in wools, from the tombs of Egyptian Christians, dating from.. 300 to 900. Of special interest are the squares with figures of
A D
Adam and Eve (No. 4), St. George slaying the Dragon (No. 18), and
God the Father among the Seraphim (Nos. 21-24). The fine pieces of

yellow silk, one with arabesque designs and an Arabic inscription in
the Kûfî character, are remarkable (Nos. 25-27). Of bier-cloths, the
finest example in Europe is probably that seen in Wall-cases 70 and
71, in the Second Egyptian Room. This cloth is embroidered in
coloured wools, with a frieze of cherubs holding necklaces, baskets
of fruit, flowers, etc. In the centre two cherubs are supporting a
crown, within which is worked a cross, and the rest of the cloth is
ornamented with doves, vases of fruit and flowers, rosettes, etc. It
belongs to the period after.. 350.
A D
The Egyptian Tomb.—The care taken by the Egyptians to
preserve the bodies of their dead would have been in vain if they
had not provided secure hiding places for their mummies. The
mummy had to be guarded against the attacks of thieves and of wild
animals, and placed beyond the reach of the waters of the
Inundation. In primitive times the dead of all classes were buried in
graves which were dug on the skirts of the desert, in the sandy or
rocky soil; this custom was dictated by economical considerations,
for the mud soil of the country, every yard of which was cultivated,
was too valuable to the living to be devoted to the dead. The graves
were usually oval in shape, and comparatively shallow, and they
were covered over with slabs and layers of sand (see Case A, First
Egyptian Room); it is probable that they were marked by some kind
of stone or stake driven into the ground near the head of the grave.
The graves, in which bodies were buried in a sitting position, were,
of course, deeper than those in which they were laid on their sides.
Over the graves of chiefs, huts made of reeds and grass were built,
and offerings of food and drink were probably placed in them, as
well as in the graves. At a later period mud houses took the place of
the reed huts, and, still later, such houses were built of stone. In the
Archaïc Period the buildings over the graves of the kings were
rectangular in form, and they contained many chambers, wherein,
no doubt, the ceremonies connected with the burial of kings were
performed, and stores of provisions of all kinds for the use of the
deceased were placed. At this time men and women of lower rank
were buried in shallow graves, the sides of which were protected

with crude bricks, and the poorest folk of all were buried together in
pits, which belonged to the community.
The Step Pyramid at Ṣaḳḳârah.
PLATE XIV.
False door from the Maṣṭaba tomb of Ȧsȧ-ānkh, a high official,
who flourished in the reign of King Ȧssȧ, about B. C. 3400.
[Vestibule, South Wall, No. 53.]
In the IIIrd dynasty, king Tcheser
𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0), whose name
a late tradition coupled with a very severe Seven Years’ Famine, built
himself, at Ṣaḳḳârah, a magnificent tomb in the form of an oblong
pyramidal building with six steps, to which the name of Step
Pyramid has been given. Its total height is about 197 feet, and the
length of its sides at the base is: south and north 352 feet, east and
west 396 feet. A common name for the tomb is Pa tchetta
𓉐(cid:0)𓏤𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0), “House of eternity,” and tombs were
endowed with estates by wealthy folk in perpetuity. The commonest
form of tomb made for royal personages and nobles at this time, and
for several centuries afterwards, was the heavy, massive building of
rectangular oblong shape, the four sides of which were four walls
symmetrically inclined towards their common centre. To this building
the name of maṣṭaba, i. e., “bench,” has been given. It was thus
called by the Arabs, because all the examples with which they were
familiar, being more than half buried in sand, resembled the long low
seats which are common in oriental houses. The exterior surfaces of
the maṣṭaba are not flat, for the face of each course of masonry,
formed of stones laid vertically, is a little behind the one beneath it,
and if these recesses were a little deeper, the external appearance of
each side of the building would resemble a flight of steps. The
height of the maṣṭaba varies from 13 feet to 30 feet, the length from
26 feet to 170 feet, and the width from 20 feet to 86 feet. The plan
of the maṣṭaba is an oblong rectangle, and the greater axis of the
rectangle is usually in the direction from south to north. Maṣṭabas
were arranged in rows symmetrically on all sides of the Pyramids at
Gîzah. The maṣṭabas at Ṣaḳḳârah are built of stone and brick. The

entrance to the maṣṭaba is usually on the east side. Near the north-
east corner is sometimes found a series of long vertical grooves, or a
“false door” (see Plate XIV), which is sometimes called the stele.
Near the south-east corner is generally another opening, but larger
and more carefully made; in this is sometimes found a fine inscribed
limestone false door, and sometimes a small architectural façade, in
the centre of which is a door. The top of the maṣṭaba is quite flat.
A group of Maṣṭaba tombs at Ṣaḳḳârah.
Tablet for offerings, or altar, of Ḥeru-sa-Ȧst, a
scribe.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 14, No. 1034.]
An Egyptian tomb of the maṣṭaba
class.
A.—The hall of the tomb in which
offerings were made.
B, C.—The pit, or shaft, leading
to the mummy chamber.
D.—A small corridor.
E.—The mummy chamber.
The soul, in the form of a human-headed bird,
descending the pit of the tomb to visit the mummy
in the mummy chamber.
The interior of the complete maṣṭaba consists of: 1. A chamber. 2.
The Serdâb. 3. A pit. 4. A mummy-chamber. The walls of the
maṣṭaba chamber may be ornamented with sculptures or not. In
it, facing the east, is a false door, which is usually inscribed. At the
foot of the false door, on the bare ground, is often seen a tablet for
offerings, made of granite, alabaster, limestone, etc., on which are
sculptured figures of meat and drink offerings—cakes, loaves of
bread, geese, a haunch of beef, vases of unguents, fruit, vegetables,
flowers, etc. In many tablets for offerings small tanks, or hollows,
with channels, are cut, and in these libations of wine were supposed
to be poured. A large collection of such tablets for offerings of all

periods, from the IVth dynasty to the Roman Period, is exhibited in
the Egyptian Gallery, Bays 14 and 16. Sometimes a pair of stands for
offerings, made of stone, is found by the stele; examples of these
are exhibited in Wall-case No. 200, in the Fourth Egyptian Room. In
the south or north wall of the maṣṭaba chamber is usually a narrow
chamber built of large stones, partly hidden in the masonry, to which
[25]
the name of Serdâb has been given. Sometimes the serdâb is
isolated from the chamber, but usually it is connected with it by
means of a rectangular passage, or slit, so narrow that the hand can
be inserted in it with difficulty. Inside the serdâb the statue of the
deceased, which was intended to serve as a dwelling-place for the
Ka, or double, was placed, and the passage was made in order to
conduct to it the smoke and smell of the burning incense and
offerings. The serdâb is sometimes called the “Ka-chapel,” and
persons of means and position generally appointed a “priest of the
Ka” to offer up offerings morning and evening. The pit, or shaft, of
the maṣṭaba was rectangular, square, or oblong, but never round,
and it varied in depth from 40 to 80 feet. It led to the chamber
below the ground where the mummy was laid. At the bottom of the
pit, on the south side, was an opening into a passage from 4 to 5
feet high; this passage led obliquely to the south-east, in the same
direction as the upper chamber, and then expanded on all sides and
became the sarcophagus chamber, or mummy chamber. When the
dried or mummified body had been placed in the sarcophagus, and
the cover of the sarcophagus had been sealed, the pit was filled with
stones, mud, and sand, and the deceased was thus preserved from
all ordinary chances of disturbance.
The ornamentation of the maṣṭaba consisted of sculptured
scenes of three classes: 1. Biographical. 2. Sepulchral. 3. Those
referring to the cult of the dead and funerary gifts. In them we see
the deceased hunting, fishing, making pleasure excursions by water,
listening to music and watching women dance, overseeing building
operations, or the work of ploughing, sowing and reaping on his
estate, the management of cattle, the bringing of offerings to his
tomb, etc. The reader will gain a good idea of the general

arrangement of the false doors inside the maṣṭaba chamber, and the
painted decorations and sculptures of an ordinary maṣṭaba, by
examining the complete monument exhibited in the Assyrian Saloon.
This was built originally on the side of a small spur of the mountain
near Ṣaḳḳârah for Ur-ȧri-en-Ptaḥ, a royal scribe and councillor who
flourished in the reign of Pepi II Nefer-ka-Rā, about.. 3100. It is
B C
interesting to note that two “false doors” are found on the south wall
of this maṣṭaba, one for Ur-ȧri-en-Ptaḥ and one for his wife Khent-
kaut-s, and that the former contains a list of names of about ninety
canonical offerings. The decorations of maṣṭabas never include
figures of gods, or the emblems which at a later period were
considered sacred.
[26]
The next form of the tomb was the pyramid, which is to all
intents and purposes merely a maṣṭaba built on a square base, with
the greater part of it above the surface of the ground. It contained a
long passage, with a sarcophagus chamber, or mummy chamber, at
the end of it. The place of the maṣṭaba chamber was taken by a
small temple, or chapel, built outside the pyramid, in which funerary
gifts and offerings were made; the pit of the maṣṭaba was
represented by a long passage, which sloped either upwards or
downwards; and the mummy-chamber in each case was
substantially the same. The principal pyramids of Egypt are those of
Abû Roâsh, Gîzah, Zâwyet al-ʿAryân, Abû-Ṣîr, Ṣaḳḳârah, Lisht,
Dahshûr, Al-Lâhûn, Ḥawârah, and Kulla. In the Egyptian Sûdân there
are pyramids at Kurrû, Zûma, Tanḳâsi, Gebel Barkal, Nûrî, and
Bagrawîr, but all these are inferior in design and construction to the
pyramids of Egypt. The latest of the pyramid tombs in the Sûdân
were built probably during the first or second century.. by a series
A D
of native queens, each of whom bore the name of “Candace.” A
great many theories, chiefly of an astronomical character, have been
formulated about the Pyramids of Gîzah: but it is now generally
thought that they were tombs and nothing else, and there is no
evidence to justify us in believing that they were built by any of the
Hebrew patriarchs, or that they were the “Granaries of Joseph,” or
that they contain chambers filled with gold and precious stones,

which have not yet been discovered or cleared out. The kings of the
XIIth dynasty followed the example of their predecessors of the Vth
and VIth dynasties, and built pyramids for their tombs, but they
were on a much smaller scale. The pyramids of Ȧmenemḥāt I and
Usertsen I were at Lisht, those of Ȧmenemḥāt II and Usertsen III
were at Dahshûr, the pyramid of Usertsen II was at Al-Lâhûn, and
that of Ȧmenemḥāt III was at Ḥawârah. Nobles and high officials
built pyramidal tombs, usually about 30 feet high, which were
supposed to contain the three essential parts of the tomb, the upper
chamber, the pit, or shaft, and the mummy chamber; but as a
matter of fact, the body was buried in the brickwork which formed
the base of such a pyramid; there was no pit, and the pyramid itself
represented the upper chamber.
A section of the Second Pyramid of Gîzah, built by Khāfrā (Chephren), showing a
piece of the original casing at the top, underground passage, and mummy
chamber.
Entrance to the tomb of Khnemu-ḥetep, an official, at Beni Hasan.
XIIth dynasty.
PLATE XV.
View of a painted chamber in the tomb of the scribe Nekht.
XVIIIth dynasty, about B. C. 1450.
PLATE XVI.
Wall-painting from a tomb.
Scene: Payment of tribute. Sûdânî men bearing rings of gold, logs of ebony,
panther-skins, apes, etc.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 13, No. 520.]
Rock-hewn tombs.—The pyramid tomb was suitable for regions
where the ground was flat, but the Egyptians who dwelt in places
near mountains began at an early period of history to hew tombs in
them. Thus at Aswân (Syene) the mountains on the west bank of
the Nile contain three tiers of tombs, the oldest being those of
nobles and governors of Elephantine under the VIth and VIIth
dynasties. These are approached by means of a staircase cut in the
slope of the hill, down the middle of which a smooth path was made

for the purpose of drawing up the coffins and sarcophagi of the
dead. At the top of the staircase the hill was scarped, and here the
chambers of the tombs were hewn. The “false doors” were cut in the
solid rock, and were above the mouth of the shaft, or pit, at the
bottom of which, in chambers made for the purpose, the mummies
were placed. Some of the tombs of the XIIth dynasty on the north
side of the hill have long corridors leading to the mouths of the pits,
and above these are the “false doors,” before which statues were
sometimes placed.
Entrance to a royal tomb in the Valley of the Tombs of the
Kings.
I. Ground Plan of the Tomb of Seti I, B. C. 1366.
II. Section of the Tomb of Seti I.
(From Lepsius, Denkmäler, Abth. I, Bl. 96.)
Wall-painting from a tomb.
Scene: Servants of a high official bearing offerings to the tomb.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 12, No. 517.]
Under the XVIIIth dynasty rock-hewn tombs of great size were
made, and the finest examples of these are undoubtedly the Tombs
of the Kings at Thebes. The annexed plan and section of the tomb
of Seti I will give an idea of the extent of the largest of them. A is a
flight of steps, B a corridor, C a second flight of steps, D a corridor,
E, F, and G are rectangular chambers, H and I corridors, K an ante-
chamber, L the large six-pillared hall in which stood the king’s
sarcophagus and mummy, and M, N, O, P, Q are chambers in which
funerary ceremonies were performed. Under the sarcophagus is
another staircase, which leads to an unfinished passage, its entrance
being about 150 feet below the entrance to the first staircase; the
total length of the tomb is about 700 feet. The walls of the corridors
and of most of the chambers are decorated with hieroglyphic texts
and vignettes which illustrate mythological legends and the funerary
ceremonies, all painted in bright colours, and on the roof of the
great hall are painted lists of the thirty-six Dekans and other stars,
and several figures of solar and stellar gods. The Tombs of the Kings

were all built on practically one and the same plan; the modifications
which are found in the details are due partly to structural difficulties,
and partly to the variation in the length of the time which was
devoted to their making. They cover a period of about 550 years,
i. e.,.. 1600-1050. At the entrances to some of the tombs of nobles
B C
and high officials gardens were laid out and trees planted, and these
were, of course, maintained out of the endowments of the tombs.
Under the XXVIth dynasty attempts were made to reproduce tombs
after the plans of the XIXth dynasty, and a few very remarkable
tombs, e. g., that of Peṭā-Ȧmen-ȧpt at Thebes, were the result. The
decoration was, however, inferior, and the scribes who drafted the
texts for the walls contented themselves with making extracts from
the old funerary compositions, and invented few that were wholly
new.
Limestone coffin of Ḥes-Peṭān-
Ȧst.
Ptolemaïc Period.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay
26, No. 968.]
The poor were buried in shallow graves made in the desert, or in
caves and hollows in the mountains. Some of the caves in the
Theban hills are literally filled with skulls and bones and the remains
of badly made mummies, and the same may be said of several
“mummy pits,” in many parts of Egypt, which were the common
property of the neighbouring towns. Among such remains are found
cheap porcelain scarabs and poorly moulded figures of the gods, and
sometimes coarse papyrus sandals, which prove that the equipment
of the poor for their journey to the Other World was cheap and
meagre.
Tomb Equipment.—To describe here in detail all the varieties of
objects which may be fittingly grouped under this head is impossible,
but the principal requirements of the dead of well-to-do folk may be
thus enumerated: 1. Coffin, or coffins, painted and decorated
according to the means of the relatives. A fine collection of coffins,

which illustrates all the important varieties between.. 2600 and
B C.. 300 is exhibited in the First and Second Egyptian Rooms. Fine
A D
sarcophagi in wood and stone will be found in the Second Egyptian
Room and in the Southern Egyptian Gallery (see Plates XVII and
XVIII). 2. A stele, or sepulchral tablet, recording the name and
pedigree of the deceased, and containing usually a prayer to certain
gods for sepulchral offerings (see Plate XIX). Examples of almost
every kind of sepulchral tablet in stone will be found on the shelves
in the Egyptian Galleries, and brightly painted wooden tablets are
exhibited in the Third Egyptian Room (Wall-cases Nos. 99-113). 3. A
set of Canopic Jars (see above page 160). 4. A statue, or figure,
seated or standing, usually inscribed, which was intended to form a
dwelling place for the “double” (Ka) of the deceased, and to receive
the offerings of his friends and relatives. (See the double statue of
Ka-ṭep and Ḥetep-ḥeres from their maṣṭaba at Gîzah, and Third
Egyptian Room, Wall-case 99 ff.) 5. A ushabti figure, i. e., a figure
which was supposed to transform itself into a living man in the Other
World at the command of the deceased, and to perform any
agricultural work which he might be condemned to do. In some
tombs scores of ushabtiu have been found, and when a large
number was buried in a tomb, a special box to hold them was
provided. (For examples see Second Egyptian Room, Wall-cases Nos.
77-82.) 6. A Heart-scarab, i. e., a model of a beetle (of the Goliath
species?) usually in hard green stone, which was either inserted in
the breast of the deceased, where it was intended to take the place
of his heart which had been removed during the process of
mummification, or was fastened on the breast over the heart. It was
inscribed with the text of Chapter XXX of the Book of the Dead, in
B
which the deceased prays that his heart may be victorious in the
judgment, that no hostile or lying witnesses may appear against
him, etc. This prayer is very old, and a Rubric to the LXIVth Chapter
proves that it was in existence early in the IVth dynasty. Frequently
the heart-scarab was inserted in a rectangular temple-shaped
plaque, or pectoral (see Table-case I, in the Fourth Egyptian Room).
7. A copy of some religious text or texts (Book of the Dead),
written upon stone, wood, or papyrus. In the Vth dynasty such texts

were cut on the walls of pyramid chambers, corridors, etc. In the
XIth dynasty they were traced in ink on the stone mummy chambers
and on the sides of wooden sarcophagi. (See the coffin of Āmamu in
the First Egyptian Room, Case C.) In the XVIIIth-XXVIth dynasties
they were written on rolls of papyrus which were placed in the coffin
with the mummy, or between the legs of the mummy, or in a niche
in the wall of the tomb. Sometimes the mummy was wrapped wholly
in inscribed papyrus, and sometimes the texts were written on the
linen swathings. 8. A set of vessels (bowls, jars, vases, bottles,
etc.) for holding unguents, oils, astringent liquids, etc., for use in the
Other World. These were made of granite, diorite, breccia, alabaster,
etc., and their shapes are often exceedingly graceful. A very
complete collection of them will be seen in the Fourth Egyptian
Room; the oldest date from the Archaïc Period, and the series
continues to the XXVIth dynasty at least. 9. Royal ladies and
priestesses were usually provided with a toilet box containing
combs, mirror, hair-pins, hair-tweezers, sandals, tubes of eye-paint,
flasks of sweet unguent, etc.; for an example see Standard-case L,
in the Fourth Egyptian Room. 10. A Pillow made of wood, ivory,
alabaster, etc.
Painted limestone figures of Ka-
ṭep and his wife Ḥetep-ḥeres.
IVth dynasty, B. C. 3750.
[Vestibule, East Doorway, No.
14.]
The tombs of the wealthy were provided with chairs, tables,
couches, stools, boxes, painted and inlaid to hold jewellery, scents,
etc., and many articles which the Egyptians used daily in their
professions. The sistrum, cymbals, and bells which the priestess
used in the temple were buried with her; the bow and arrows of the
hunter, the favourite inscribed staff of authority of the official, the
spear, dagger and axe of the warrior, the palette and colour-pots of
the artist, the sceptre or symbol of office of the governor, children’s
toys and dolls, dice, draughts, and counters used in games—all

these things went to form the equipment for the tomb in individual
cases, and examples of them are to be seen in the Third and Fourth
Egyptian Rooms.
Of personal ornaments of the dead the variety is endless, but a
very good general idea of them may be obtained from the collections
in the Table-cases in the Fourth Egyptian Room. In Case F, one side
is filled with amulets, many of which were worn for decorative
purposes during life by their owners, and the other side contains a
collection of necklaces and beads belonging to various periods
between.. 1700 and.. 100. The beads are made of gold,
B C A D
amethyst, garnet, carnelian, mother-of-emerald, lapis-lazuli, agate,
topaz, glass, etc., all which materials were believed to possess
magical properties, and the pendants were intended to bring luck,
long life, health, etc., to their wearers. The necklaces of the early
period will be found in Case J, some of which belong to the period
of the Early Empire; the porcelain beads and necklaces are in Case
B. At one period unpierced, round and conical beads were made in
Egypt. (See Table-case L, Second Egyptian Room.) They were found
placed in semi-circular rows on a layer of clay, which was intended
to serve as a necklace or breastplate for a mummy. A fine display of
gold rings, pendants, bracelets, etc., will be found in Table-
case J in the Fourth Egyptian Room. Worthy of special note are: the
gold bracelets of Nemareth (Nos. 134, 135), the gold uraeus (No.
105), the “heart-scarab” in massive gold setting (No. 132), the hawk
of gold (No. 133), gold pendant (No. 137), gold pectoral (No. 138),
gold bangle with figures in gold and silver alternately (No. 140),
gold lion (No. 175), Scarab of Sebekemsaf, a king of the XIVth
dynasty (No. 195), gold rings inscribed with the names of
Thothmes III, Ḥātshepset, Shishak I, Ȧmen-ḥetep III, and Ptolemy
III (Nos. 198, 201, 217, 237, 266), silver rings inscribed with the
names of Ȧmen-ḥetep IV, Shishak, and Psammetichus (Nos. 390,
392), and a very fine collection of 64 scarabs in agate, onyx, lapis-
lazuli, etc., from the tomb of a princess of the XIIth dynasty, about.. 2400 (No. 382).
B C
PLATE XVII.

General view of the Sarcophagus of King Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt, B. C. 378, engraved with
scenes and texts from the Book of What is in the Other World, and selections from
the Book of the Praises of Rā.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 25, No. 923.]

PLATE XVIII.
Granite sarcophagus of Nes-Qeṭiu, a prince, chancellor, and scribe of Ȧmen-Rā.
XXVIth dynasty, or later.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 26, No. 825.]
PLATE XIX.
Sepulchral tablet of Ban-āa, a scribe.
XVIIIth dynasty.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 9, No. 474.]

CHAPTER IX.
N C O. D T: T C, S P.
UMBERS ARDINAL AND RDINAL IVISIONS OF IME HE ALENDAR OTHIC ERIOD
C.
HRONOLOGY
Numbers.—The numbers 1 to 9 are expressed by short perpendicular
strokes, e. g., 𓏺 = 1, 𓏻 = 2, 𓏼 = 3, 𓏻(cid:0)𓏻 = 4, 𓏾 = 5, 𓏿 = 6,  = 7,  = 8, and  =
9. The number 10 is expressed by 𓎆, 100 by 𓍢, 1,000 by 𓆼, 10,000 by 𓂭,
100,000 by 𓆏, 1,000,000 by 𓁨, and 10,000,000 by 𓍶; tens up to 90 are
expressed by repeating the sign for ten, 𓎆, so many times; hundreds up to 900
by repeating the sign for hundred, 𓍢, so many times; thousands up to 9,000 by
repeating the sign for thousand, 𓆼, so many times; and so on. The following
extract will illustrate the use of these signs:—
I.
Ru geese 𓆾𓆾𓍩𓎆𓎆 = 6,820
Khet-āa geese 𓆼𓍣(cid:0)𓍣𓎆 = 1,410
Turpu geese 𓆼𓍢𓍣(cid:0)𓍣𓎆𓎆𓎆𓏻(cid:0)𓏻 = 1,534
Tchau geese 𓍢𓎊 = 150
Mest geese 𓆿𓎋 = 4,060
Water fowl 𓂮𓇀𓎆𓎆 = 25,020
Menāt birds 𓂭𓂭𓂭𓂭𓂭𓆼𓆼𓆼𓆼𓆼𓆼𓆼𓍩𓎆 = 57,810
Paṭ birds 𓂮𓆼𓍢𓍧 = 21,700
Paāsh birds 𓆼𓍣𓎉 = 1,240
Birds 𓆾𓆾𓍢𓍣(cid:0)𓍣𓎆 = 6,510
Total No. of birds: 𓆏(cid:0)𓏤𓂮𓆾𓆾𓍣𓎆𓎉𓏻(cid:0)𓏻 = 126,254
II.
𓅧𓈎(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0) 𓆏𓆏𓆏𓆏𓆏𓆏𓆏𓆏𓆏𓂯𓂯𓂯𓆽𓍧𓍢𓎊
Large loaves 992,750.

Fractions 𓂋(cid:0)𓏥 = ⅓, 𓐝 = ½, (cid:0) = ⅔, 𓂋(cid:0)𓎆 = ⅟₁₀, 𓂋(cid:0)𓍢 = ⅟₁₀₀,
𓂋(cid:0)𓆼
= ⅟₁₀₀₀,
𓂋(cid:0)𓎆(cid:0)𓎆(cid:0)𓎆(cid:0)𓎆(cid:0)
= ⅟₄₅, etc. Ordinal numbers are
indicated by 𓎖 placed before the figure, or by 𓏌 placed after it; e. g. 𓎖𓏿 =
“sixth,” 𓏌 = “seventh.”
Divisions of Time.—The smallest fraction was the ȧnt,
𓁻(cid:0)𓈖𓏏(cid:0)𓇳,
one
third of a second, or “the twinkling of an eye.” Then came the ḥat
𓇉𓄿𓏏(cid:0)𓇳,
second; the at
𓄁𓏏(cid:0)𓇳,
minute; and the unnut
𓃹(cid:0)𓈖𓏌(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)
hour.
Twenty-four hours made one day, hru
𓉔(cid:0)𓂋𓅱𓇳(cid:0)𓏤,
ten days made one week,
and thirty days one calendar month,
𓇺(cid:0)𓂧(cid:0)𓇼(cid:0)𓇳.
Twelve months plus
the five epagomenal days made one vague or calendar year, renpit
𓂋(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏭𓏏𓆳𓇳.
Longer periods of time were:—
Seṭ period 𓋴𓂧(cid:0)𓈅𓉳 = 30 years.
Two-Ḥenti period 𓎨𓎨𓇳(cid:0)𓇳 = 120 ”
Ḥeḥ 𓎛𓇳𓎛 = An Age.
Tchetta 𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0) = Eternity.
We also have:—
(cid:0)(cid:0) = Millions of years.
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0) = 10,000,000 years.
(cid:0) = 1,000,000,000,000 years.
[glyph not in Unicode] = 10,000,000,000,000 years.
[glyph not in Unicode] = 1,000,000,000,000,000,000 years.
In late times the Sothic Period and the Phoenix Period were used by the
Greeks, but there is no evidence that either was known to the Ancient
Egyptians.
Chronology, and the ancient Egyptian Year. The Calendars of Lucky and
Unlucky Days indicate that in very early times the Egyptian Year consisted of
12 months each of 30 days, i. e., that the primitive year contained 360 days.
Whether the Egyptians ever tried to use the lunar year of 354 days there is no
evidence to show. Now the progress of the seasons would, in a few years, soon
convince those who used the year of 360 days that their year did not agree
with the solar year, and that it was too short, and they would be obliged to add
to its days in some way. The inscriptions prove that even at so early a period as

the reign of Pepi II of the VIth dynasty, the Egyptians were in the habit of
adding five days each year to their year of 360 days, and that before..
B C
3000 the year in common use contained 365 days. These “five days” are
known as “the days over the year”
𓆳𓁷(cid:0)𓂋𓅱𓇳(cid:0),
or
𓇳(cid:0)𓏦𓏾𓁷(cid:0)𓂋𓅱𓇯(cid:0)𓏥𓆳𓏏(cid:0)𓏤,
or “the five epagomenal days,” and they were
said to be the days on which Osiris, Horus, Set, Isis, and Nephthys respectively
were born. The primitive year of 360 days was divided into three seasons.
The first season was Shat, or Akhet,
𓆷𓏏(cid:0)𓇳;
it began about July 19 and
ended about November 15, and corresponded practically with the period of the
Inundation. The second season was Pert
𓉐(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇳;
it began about
November 15 and ended about March 15. The third season was Shemu
𓈚(cid:0)𓈗;
it began about March 15 and ended about July 13. These seasons to
the Egyptians represented roughly Winter, Spring, and Summer. Each
season contained four months, which were in early times called the first,
second, third, and fourth month of that season; in later times a name was
given to each month. The following was the early calendar:—
C
OPTIC
[27]
N.
AME
𓇺(cid:0)𓏺𓆷𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 1st Month of sowing T HOTH. ⎫
𓇺(cid:0)𓏻𓆷𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 2nd ” P AOPHI. ⎪
” Inundation
𓇺(cid:0)𓏼𓆷𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 3rd ” A THYR. ⎪ time and
” Winter.
𓇺(cid:0)𓏽𓆷𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 4th ” C HOIAK. ⎭
”
𓇺(cid:0)𓏺𓉐(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 1st Month of growing T YBI. ⎫
𓇺(cid:0)𓏻𓉐(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 2nd ” M ECHIR. ⎪
”
𓇺(cid:0)𓏼𓉐(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 3rd ” P HAMENOTH. ⎪ Spring.
”
𓇺(cid:0)𓏽𓉐(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇳, 4th ” P HARMUTHI. ⎭
”
𓇺(cid:0)𓏺𓈚(cid:0)𓈗[28], 1st Month of inundation P ACHONS. ⎫ Summer.
𓇺(cid:0)𓏻𓈚(cid:0)𓈗, 2nd ” P AYNI. ⎪
”
⎪

𓇺(cid:0)𓏼𓈚(cid:0)𓈗, 3rd ” E PIPHI. ⎪
”
𓇺(cid:0)𓏽𓈚(cid:0)𓈗, 4th ” M ESORE. ⎭
”
To these twelve months, as already said, five days were added, and the year
thus formed is generally known as the “vague (or wandering) year,” and the
“calendar year.” Now it is clear that since this vague year of 365 days was
shorter than the true year, or “solar year,” of 365¼, by nearly a quarter of a
day, every fourth vague year would be shorter than the true year by nearly a
whole day. Moreover, given a sufficient number of years, the vague year would
work backward through all the months of the year, until at length the first day
of the vague year would coincide with the first day of the solar year. Thus,
supposing the first day of the vague and solar years to have coincided on
January 1,.. 2000, two hundred years later the first day of the vague year
B C
would have worked back about 50 days; and five hundred years later, i. e.,
about.. 1300, the first day of the vague year would fall in the height of the
B C
summer instead of in the depth of winter. This defect in their year of 365 days
would soon become apparent, and we may be sure that they were not long in
discovering some means for correcting it. According to some authorities the
Egyptians knew the length of the true, or solar, year with considerable
exactitude, and if this be so they were well able to plan their farming
operations without any reference to the vague year. According to others the
Egyptians were ignorant of the solar year, but were acquainted with a Sothic
year, which is so called because it began on the day when the star Sepṭ (or
Sirius, or Sothis, or the Dog Star) rose heliacally, that is to say, with the sun.
This happened on July 19 or 20, and as this date was very near the time when
the Inundation began, the Egyptians considered it most convenient for their
year and the Inundation to begin at the same time. The Sothic year
contained practically 365¼ days, i. e., a few minutes more than the true, or
solar, year; and the Sothic Period, i. e., the length of the time which must
elapse between two risings of Sothis heliacally, contained 1,460 Sothic years,
or 1,461 vague, or calendar, years.
It has now to be considered how the above facts bear upon Egyptian
chronology. To make a complete scheme of Egyptian chronology we need a
complete list of the kings of Egypt, and to know the order in which each
succeeded, and the number of years which each reigned. Now, such a list does
not exist, for the lists we have only contain selections of kings’ names; and of
many a king neither the order of his succession nor the length of his reign is
known. The facts at present available do not permit the making of a complete
detailed scheme of chronology, but one which is approximately correct in

many parts of it can be framed. As authorities for the names of the kings there
are:—1. The Royal Papyrus of Turin, which, when complete, contained over
[29]
300 royal names. 2. The Tablet of Abydos, made for Seti I, containing
seventy-six names. 3. The Tablet of Ṣaḳḳârah, containing fifty names. 4. The
[30]
Egyptian monuments of all periods. 5. The King List of Manetho. The
Turin Papyrus, which was compiled about.. 1500, gave the lengths of the
B C
reigns of the kings, but unfortunately most of them are broken. Manetho
compiled his King List, it is said for Ptolemy II Philadelphus, in the first half of
the third century.., but, as the work in which it appeared is lost, we only
B C
know it by the copies which have come down to us in the Chronicle of Julius
Africanus (third century..), in the Chronicle of Eusebius, Bishop of
A D
Caesarea, who died about.. 340, and in the Chronography of George the
A D
Monk (eighth century..). Eusebius himself also compiled a King List, but his
A D
results differ materially from those of Manetho as given by Africanus. Manetho
divided the kings of Egypt into thirty dynasties, which he arranged in three
groups: Dynasties I-XI, XII-XIX, and XX-XXX. He also gave the lengths of the
reigns of the kings, and the cities of their origin, Memphis, Elephantine,
Thebes, etc.
Now, although a great many credible facts are to be gathered from the
above authorities from which we are justified in making the general deduction
that the period of dynastic civilization lasted between four and five thousand
years, they none of them help to fix an exact date for the reign of the first
dynastic king of Egypt, who, by general consent, is said to have been Menȧ or
Menes. If Manetho’s List were trustworthy, the difficulty would be settled, but
unfortunately one version of it makes 561 kings reign in 5,524 years, whilst
another gives the number of the kings as 361, and their total reigns as 4,480
or 4,780 years. Many Egyptologists have accepted Manetho’s statements with
modifications, but others have tried to work out more accurate results,
astronomically, by the use of the Sothic Period. It has already been said that
the Sothic Period of 1,460 years is equal to 1,461 vague, or calendar, years,
and it is argued that, if we can find mentions of the risings of Sothis (Sirius, or
the Dog-star) expressed in terms of the vague year, and if we can also fix a
date for the beginning or end of a Sothic Period, it will be possible to arrive at
fixed points in Egyptian chronology. Fortunately some three or four mentions of
the rising of Sothis are known in the inscriptions, and thanks to Censorinus,
who wrote his work (De Die Natali).. 238, it is known that a Sothic Period
A D
[31]
came to an end.. 139. If this be so, it is clear that the Sothic Period to
A D
which he refers began in.. 1321, the one before that in.. 2781, the one
B C B C
previous in.. 4241, and so on. The next step is to work out the mentions of
B C
the risings of Sothis which are expressed in terms of the vague, or calendar,

year, and, provided that the statement of Censorinus be trustworthy and the
calculations of modern investigators be correct, it is possible to assign a date in
ordinary Julian years to such risings of Sirius.
Want of space renders it impossible to discuss here the various systems of
chronology which have been formulated by Egyptologists and others, but the
dates proposed by the principal authorities for some of the dynasties may be
thus grouped:—
D. D.
YNASTY ATES PROPOSED
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
I 5869 5702 5613 5004 4400 3315
III 5318 5147 5058 4449 3966 2895
VI 4426 4402 4310 3703 3300 2540
XII 3703 3404 3315 2851 2466 2000
XVIII 1822 1655 1796 1703 1700 1580
XIX 1473 1326 1404 1462 1400 1320
XX 1279 1183 1195 1288 1200 1200
Of these systems the one proposed by the late Dr. H. Brugsch (No. 5) agrees
best with the general evidence of the monuments as to the length of the
period of Dynastic civilization; it is therefore used, with some modification of
the dates of the XVIIIth dynasty, in this book. It has been declared that the
intervals which he placed between the VIth and the XIIth, and the XIIth and
the XVIIIth dynasties are too long, but, on the other hand, many objections
can be urged against the reductions recently suggested. It is proposed to
reduce the date given by Brugsch for Menes,.. 4400, to.. 3315; but there
B C B C
is no evidence in support of the reduction. The view has been steadily growing
for years that some of the dates proposed by Brugsch for the kings of the
XVIIIth dynasty must be reduced, and as this view is supported by the
evidence derived from the recently published Babylonian Chronicles, and the
general testimony of recently excavated monuments, the dates of the reigns of
the early kings of that dynasty may well be brought down nearly one hundred
years. The other evidence on the point, being of an astronomical character, can
only be dealt with by experts. Egyptian chronology is a difficult subject, chiefly
because of an insufficiency of facts about the reigns of the kings of the VIIth-
XIth, and the XIIIth-XVIIth dynasties. Every year, however, witnesses the
removal of a certain number of difficulties, and as long as excavations are
made in Egypt a steady increase in the knowledge of the subject may
reasonably be hoped for.

CHAPTER X.
THE HISTORY OF EGYPT.
Palaeolithic Period.
The only remains of this Period in the British Museum are flint
axes, borers, scrapers, etc., typical examples of which are exhibited
in Table-case M in the Third Egyptian Room.
Neolithic Period.
Towards the end of this Period Egypt was divided into two
kingdoms, of the South and of the North; of the kings of the latter
a few names are known from the Palermo Stele, e. g., Seka, Khaȧu,
Tȧu, Thesh Neheb, Uatch-nār or Uatch-ȧnt, Mekha, etc. No
date can be assigned to the rule of these kings, but they probably all
reigned before.. 4500. Whilst Egypt was divided into two
B C
kingdoms the country was invaded, probably more than once, by a
people who made their way thither from the East, or South-East,
and settled as conquerors in the Nile Valley and Delta. They brought
with them a civilization superior to the African, and appear to have
introduced wheat, barley, the sheep, the art of writing, a superior
kind of brickmaking, etc. After a time, length unknown, there arose
a king who succeeded in uniting the Kingdoms of the North and
South under his sway; that king was Menȧ or Menes.
DYNASTIC PERIOD—ANCIENT EMPIRE.
First Dynasty. From the city of This.

About.. 4400.
B C
Menȧ, the Menes of the Greeks, was the first dynastic king of
Egypt, and has been identified by some with king Āḥa 𓂚, whose
tomb was discovered in 1897 at Abydos. Nothing is known of his
reign from the monuments, but a tradition preserved by Greek
writers declared that he altered the course of the Nile, and so
redeemed from the river a large tract upon which he built the first
city of Memphis. Among the objects in the British Museum bearing
the name of Āḥa may be mentioned some clay sealings for small
wine-jars, a portion of an ivory box, and parts of two ebony
tablets. (Table-case L in the Third Egyptian Room.)
𓅃𓉘(cid:0)𓂚(cid:0)𓊂 Ā.
ḤA
𓅃𓉘(cid:0)𓆢𓍋(cid:0)𓊂 N -.
ĀR MER
Tetȧ, or Ȧtet, was the successor of Menȧ, according to the King
Lists. In recent years this king has been identified by some with a
king whose name is provisionally read Nār-mer; others, however,
take the view that Nār-mer is one of the names of Betchau, a king of
the IInd dynasty.
𓅃𓉘(cid:0)𓏄(cid:0)𓊂 K.
HENT
𓅃𓉘(cid:0)𓆓(cid:0)𓊂 T.
CHA
The next two kings were Ȧteth and Ȧta, but of their reigns
nothing is known; according to some authorities we are to identify
King Khent with the former, and King Tcha with the latter. There
are several small objects in the British Museum inscribed with the
name of Tcha (Table-case L), and several jar-sealings (Wall-case on
Landing).
𓅃𓉘(cid:0)𓂧𓈖(cid:0)𓊂 Ṭ.
EN

The reign of the next king Semti
𓈉(cid:0)𓈉,
or Ṭen, formerly known
as Ḥesepti
𓈈(cid:0)𓈈,
was important. A legend preserved in the Book
of the Dead states that the short form of the LXIVth Chapter of that
work was “found” during his reign; and on the tablet exhibited in
Table-case L, Third Egyptian Room (No. 124), the king is
represented dancing before a god, who wears the White Crown and
is seated within a shrine placed on the top of a flight of steps. As in
later texts Osiris is called “the god on the steps,” and the White
Crown is one of his most characteristic emblems, we are probably
justified in identifying the figure in the shrine with that of Osiris. It is
probable that the worship of Osiris assumed an importance in the
reign of Semti hitherto unknown, and that it was at this period that
the cult of this god began to displace the worship of ancestors,
which, up to that time, appears to have been general. It is clear that
tradition assigned to his reign a period of literary activity. The name
of Semti also occurs in connexion with a recipe in a book of
medicine for driving the disease ukhedu out of the body. (For
objects bearing his name see Table-case L, and for wine-jar sealings
see Wall-cases on Landing.)
King Semti dancing before the god who wears the White Crown.
The sixth king of this dynasty was Āṭȧb, or Ātchȧb, otherwise
known as Merpeba, or Merbapen. (For a number of objects bearing
his names see Table-case L and Wall-cases on Landing.)
The next king, according to the King Lists, was called Semerkha,
or Ḥu, or Nekht, or Semsu, the Semempses of Manetho. (For
objects bearing his name see Table-case L and Wall-cases on
Landing.)
𓅃𓉘(cid:0)𓈎𓂝(cid:0)𓊂 Q.
Ā
This dynasty was brought to a close by the reign of a king called
Qebḥ in the later Lists; the correct form of his name is, however,
Sen, and his Horus name is Qā. (For objects bearing his name see
Table-case L and Wall-cases on Landing.)

Second Dynasty. From the city of This.
About.. 4133.
B C
The first king of the IInd dynasty was Khā-Sekhemui, 𓈍𓌂𓌂 other
names of whom were Betchau, Neter-baiu, and Besh. From the
reliefs on the statues of this king which were recovered from his
tomb at Abydos, we may assume that Besh fought many battles,
and conquered his enemies. From a design on one of his vases we
learn that he was probably the first to enclose his personal name
within the Shennu sign 𓍶, which was afterwards elongated into the
cartouche 𓍷 when royal names became longer. In this design we
see the vulture-goddess Nekhebit uniting the South and the North,
and holding in one claw the sign 𓍶, with the name Besh written
within it thus
𓃀(cid:0)𓈚.
Betchau, or Besh, has been identified by some
with Nār-mer. There are no objects bearing the name of Nār-mer in
the British Museum, but a good cast of a green slate shield of
Betchau is exhibited in Wall-case 10 on the Landing of the North-
West Staircase. The designs on this remarkable object are
reproduced in the Guide to the First and Second Egyptian Rooms, p.
40 ff. The objects found in the tomb of Besh prove that the
Egyptians were, even at this early period, skilled in stone-cutting,
statue-making, and working in metals, and that their religious and
social institutions must have been established for many generations.
(See the copper vases and wine-jar sealings on the Landing, and
the interesting group of objects, fragments of vases, etc., in Table-
case L.)
Besh was followed by Ḥetep-Sekhemui 𓊵𓌂𓌂, of whom we have
a fragment of a stone vase (Table-case L, No. 162); and by Rā-neb
and En-neter (see the fragment of a bowl in Table-case L, No.
163). During the reign of Rā-neb, who was also called Ka-kau, the
worship of the Apis Bull of Memphis, the Mnevis Bull of Heliopolis,
and the Ram of Mendes was either reconstituted, or additional
shrines were founded or old ones repaired. (For typical figures of

these gods see Table-case H, Third Egyptian Room.) After
Uatchnes, of whom nothing is known, came a king who as the
representative of Horus was called Sekhem-ȧb, and as the
representative of Set, Perȧbsen. In Table-case L are a jar-sealing
and a fragment of a stone vase, and in the Wall-case on the Landing
a fine, hard grey granite stele, inscribed with his Set name.
Slab from the tomb of Sherȧ, a Priest
of the Ka of Senṭ, a king of the IInd
dynasty, B. C. 4000.
[Vestibule, South Wall, No. 1.]
Senṭ or Senṭȧ is mentioned in connexion with a certain medical
work which was either written or edited in the reign of Semti, the
fifth king of the Ist dynasty. Nothing is known of Senṭ’s reign, but we
find from the tomb of Sherȧ, a priest, that services were performed
on behalf of his Ka or “Double” and that of his predecessor
Perȧbsen. Sherȧ the priest probably lived at the end of the IInd, or
at the beginning of the IIIrd, dynasty. A fine slab from his tomb is
exhibited in the Egyptian Vestibule, No. 1.
Of the remaining kings of the IInd dynasty, Neferkarā,
Neferkaseker, Ḥetchefa, and Bebi, or Tchatchai, their names
only have survived.
Third Dynasty. From Memphis.
About.. 3966.
B C
The greatest of the kings of this dynasty was Tcheser, or
Tcheser-sa, who is renowned as the builder of the famous Step
Pyramid at Ṣaḳḳârah. This pyramid is about 200 feet high, and has
six “steps,” 38, 36, 34½, 33, 31, and 29½ feet high respectively; the
lengths of its sides at the base are: north and south, 352 feet, east
and west 396 feet. A tomb of Tcheser, who has been identified with
this king, was discovered at Bêt Khallâf in 1901. Details of his reign
are wanting, but, according to a legend preserved on a rock stele on
the Island of Sâḥal in the First Cataract, a Seven Years’ Famine

came upon Egypt in his time, and want and misery were universal.
Greek tradition ascribed to Tcheser great medical knowledge, and he
is said to have been a patron of literature. Among the objects of this
king in the British Museum may be mentioned the fragment of a
slate vase (Table-case L, No. 169), and the very interesting small
glazed tiles (Nos. 208, 209, in the same case; and see Table-case
K in the Fourth Egyptian Room, Nos. 863-869), which were found
inlaid in the wall of the doorway in the pyramid of King Tcheser.
The other kings of this dynasty, Ḥen-Nekhtor, Sa-Nekht,
Tcheser-Tetȧ, Setches, and Nefer-ka-Rā Ḥuni were
unimportant; the last named is mentioned in the famous Book of
Moral Precepts known as the Prisse Papyrus, where he is said to
have been the predecessor of the great king Seneferu. With the
ending of the IIIrd dynasty the period of Egyptian History called the
Archaïc Period closes. During these dynasties civilization had
advanced greatly in Egypt. The habitations of the living were now
built of brick, with wooden roofs supported on pillars; and the dead
were provided with stone-built tombs, called maṣṭabas, in which
they were laid at full length, instead of in contracted positions. The
art of writing had been introduced, and the beginning of the
hieroglyphic system invented. Sculptors and metal workers had
attained considerable skill, and potters had learned how to apply
glaze. The progress made during the Archaïc Period can be
successfully studied by the visitor from the valuable collection of
objects exhibited in Table-case L in the Second Egyptian Room, and
in the Wall-cases on the Landing of the North-West Staircase. Special
attention should be given to the green slate shields, sculptured in
relief with hunting scenes, and to the fine display of vases and
bowls, in diorite, granite, porphyry, jasper, breccia, limestone,
alabaster, etc., in Wall-cases 137-142, 194-204, in the Fourth
Egyptian Room. To the same period probably belong:—1. The
portion of a sculptured stele, with the Horus name of a king, which
was found at Wâdî Maghârah in the Peninsula of Sinai (Egyptian
Vestibule, No. 2). 2. The very interesting red granite statue, of a
most archaïc character, of Betchmes, a royal kinsman and axeman

who was attached to the body-guard of the king (Egyptian Vestibule,
No. 3). 3. The text on a limestone slab in which the hieroglyphics
are not divided by lines (Egyptian Vestibule, No. 4). 4. Relief from
the tomb of Suten-ȧbu (Egyptian Vestibule, No. 5).
Relief from the tomb of Suten-ȧbu.
IIIrd or IVth dynasty, B. C. 3700.
[Vestibule, South Wall, No. 5.]
Fourth Dynasty. From Memphis.
About.. 3733.
B C
With the accession of Seneferu one of the most important
periods in the history of Egypt opened, and it was marked by the
conquest of the Sûdân and the Sinaitic Peninsula, by the
building of the Pyramids, and by the production of bas-reliefs,
sculptures, wall-paintings, etc., which for fidelity to nature and
delicacy of execution were never surpassed. Several of the earlier
kings of Egypt had trade relations with the natives of Sinai who
worked the famous copper and turquoise mines of Wâdî Maghârah;
but Seneferu invaded the country and conquered it, and cut reliefs
on the rocks in which he is represented clubbing the rebellious
natives. He was the first to group four of the royal titles within a
cartouche thus:
𓍹(cid:0)𓆥𓅒𓎟𓌷(cid:0)𓏏𓅉𓋴𓄤𓂋𓅱(cid:0)𓍺.
He also raided the
Sûdân, and captured, as we learn from the Palermo Stele, 7,000
men, i. e., slaves, and 200,000 animals, i. e., oxen, cows, goats, etc.
The men were, no doubt, brought to Egypt and made to labour
there on the king’s works. During the reign of Seneferu, Egypt was
invaded by certain Eastern tribes by way of the desert; and the
country seems to have suffered from a famine. Seneferu was
probably buried in the Pyramid of Mêdûm, which is called the
“False Pyramid,” and is of an unusual shape; it is about 115 feet
high, and consists of three stages, which are 70, 20, and 25 feet
high respectively. He also built a pyramid at Dahshûr. His queen was
Mert-tefs
𓌻(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓋴,
who survived him and was living

during the reigns of Khufu and Khāfrā; a limestone false door from
her tomb is exhibited in the Egyptian Vestibule, No. 7. The governor
of Seneferu’s pyramid at Mêdûm was Ka-nefer (for his sepulchral
stele see the Egyptian Vestibule, No. 8), to whose memory a pious
son set up the memorial tablet No. 9.
King Khufu (Cheops).
[Vestibule, South Wall, No. 13.]
Seneferu was succeeded by Khufu, the Cheops of the Greeks,
the son of Shaȧru
𓍹(cid:0)𓈚𓄿𓁹(cid:0)𓂋𓅱(cid:0)𓍺,
the greatest king of the
dynasty; he is said to have reigned sixty-three years. He may have
been a great warrior, like Seneferu; and a relief on the rocks at Wâdî
Maghârah in the Sinaitic Peninsula represents him in the act of
clubbing a typical foe in the presence of the ibis-headed god Thoth.
He was, however, a far greater builder, and he has been known to
fame for some thousands of years as the builder of the Great
Pyramid (see Plate XX). This wonderful building, which the
Egyptians called “Khut,”
𓅜𓐍(cid:0)𓏏𓉴,
stands on the edge of a ledge of
rock forming the “skirt” (hence the name Gîzah) of the desert, on
the western bank of the Nile, about 5 miles from the river, near the
village of Al-Gîzah. It covers an area of 12½ acres. It is 451 feet
high, and the flat space at the top is about 30 feet square. The
length of each side at the base is 755 feet; but before the outer
layers of stone were removed and used in Cairo for building material
each side was 20 feet longer, and the pyramid itself was about 30
feet higher. It was originally covered with inscribed slabs of smooth
limestone or polished granite, and it is calculated that it at present
contains 85,000,000 cubic feet of masonry. The illustration on page
197 illustrates the general arrangement of the chambers and
corridors inside the pyramid, and the corridor and mummy chamber
beneath it. The stone used in building was quarried at Ṭura, on the
eastern bank of the Nile, about 8 or 9 miles from the pyramid site. It
was rolled down to the river on a made road, and ferried across in
barges, and then rolled up the embanked road and causeway to the

rock. According to Diodorus (i, 63), the building occupied at least
twenty years, and some 300,000 men were employed in the work.
Herodotus says (ii, 64) that ten years were consumed in the
quarrying of the stone, and ten more in building, and that the men
worked in gangs of ten thousand, each gang working three months
at a time. A group of three casing stones from the Great Pyramid
are exhibited in the Egyptian Vestibule, Nos. 10-12, and also a
plaster cast of a statue of Khufu (No. 13). Attached to the Great
Pyramid was a funerary temple in which commemorative services
were performed; and either towards the end of the king’s reign, or
soon after his death, one of the chief priests in it was Ka-ṭep, who
held the office of “Prefect of the sa” 𓌂𓅓𓎂, i. e., of the “fluid of life.”
Ka-ṭep was a “royal kinsman,” and his wife Ḥetep-ḥeres was a
“royal kinswoman.” For the statues of Ka-ṭep and his wife, see page
177, and for “false doors” from his maṣṭaba tomb, see Egyptian
Vestibule, Nos. 14-17, and for his censers, see Wall-case 200 in
the Fourth Egyptian Room, Nos. 52, 53. Another official who
flourished about this period was Sheshȧ, from whose tomb came
the limestone stele in the Egyptian Vestibule, No. 18.
PLATE XX.
The Great Pyramid and Sphinx.
Section of the Great Pyramid of Gîzah, built by Khufu (Cheops), showing the
internal passages and chambers, and the underground corridor and sarcophagus
chamber.
During the reign of Khufu a large number of fine tombs were built
round about the Great Pyramid, and in some of them fine monolithic
sarcophagi were placed. An excellent idea of this class of monument
may be gained from an examination of the cast of the sarcophagus
of Khufu-ānkh (Egyptian Vestibule, No. 19).
Here, because the monument is associated with the name of
Khufu in the inscription of Thothmes IV, must be mentioned the
Sphinx, in Egyptian Ḥu
𓎛𓅱(cid:0). The early history of this wonderful
man-headed lion is unknown, but it seems that some work upon the
rock out of which it was fashioned was undertaken by Khufu. Under

the XIIth dynasty the headdress, called nemmes, was cut, and it is
possible that an attempt was made to give the face some
resemblance to that of Ȧmen-em-ḥāt III, or one of his predecessors,
about the same time. At a later period the Sphinx was identified with
Rā-Harmachis, probably under the influence of an ancient tradition
which connected it with the Sun-god. It is 150 feet long and 70 feet
high; the head is 30 feet long and the face 14 feet wide. Originally
the face was painted a bright red, and traces of the colour are still
visible. Traditions and superstitions have gathered about it in all
ages, and it is probable that the rock out of which it was made was
regarded with veneration in primitive times. In the Middle Ages the
natives believed that the Sphinx kept the sands of the Western
Desert from swallowing up the village of Gîzah. A portion of the
painted limestone uraeus, or asp, from the forehead and a
portion of the beard of the Sphinx are exhibited in the Egyptian
Vestibule, Nos. 20 and 21.
King Khāfrā (Chephren).
Khufu was succeeded by Ṭeṭ-f-Rā, of whom nothing is known;
and he again was succeeded by Khā-f-Rā, the Chephren of the
Greek writers, who is famous chiefly as the builder of the Second
Pyramid at Gîzah, called in Egyptian “Ur” 𓅨𓉴, i. e., the “Great.” Its
height is about 450 feet, the length of each side at the base is 700
feet, and it is said to contain about 60,000,000 cubic feet of
masonry, weighing some 4,883,000 tons. It was first opened by
Belzoni (born 1778, died 1823) in 1816. It was originally cased with
polished stone, but only towards the top has the casing been
preserved. The illustration on page 171 shows the arrangement of
the corridor and sarcophagus chamber, which is very different from
that of the Great Pyramid. A funerary chapel was attached to the
pyramid; and among those who ministered in it was Rutchek, the
chief of the libationer priests, who calls himself a “friend of Pharaoh”
𓋴𓍋𓈖𓉐(cid:0)𓉻.
(For an architrave and an inscription from his tomb see
Egyptian Vestibule, Nos. 22 and 23.) The Pyramid itself was in

charge of the “royal kinsman” Thethȧ, who was the royal steward,
and “overseer of the throne of Pharaoh,” and priest of Hathor and
Neith. Two fine doors from the maṣṭaba tomb of Thethȧ are
exhibited in the Northern Egyptian Gallery (Bay 1, Nos. 24 and 25),
together with a short inscription referring to the burial of his father
and mother (No. 26). The perfection to which the sculptor’s art had
attained at this period is well illustrated by the casts of statues of
Chephren, from the hard stone originals in the Museum in Cairo,
exhibited in the Egyptian Vestibule, Nos. 27 and 28. A fragment of
an alabaster vessel from the king’s tomb, bearing his name, is in
Wall-case 138 in the Fourth Egyptian Room, No. 56.
King Menkaurā (Mykerinos).
[Vestibule, South Wall, No. 30.]
Men-kau-Rā, the Mykerinos of Greek writers, reigned, it is said,
about sixty-three years; no details of his reign are known, and he is
chiefly famous as the builder of the Third Pyramid at Gîzah, which
the Egyptians called “Ḥer”
𓁷(cid:0)𓂋𓉴.
This pyramid is between 210 and
215 feet high, and the length of each side at the base is about 350
feet. The illustration on page 202 shows the position of the corridors
and the mummy chamber, which is 60 feet below the surface of the
ground, and also indicates the damage which was done to the
pyramid by the Khalîfa Al-Mâmûn, who, believing that it was full of
gold and precious stones, tried to demolish it. The pyramid was
originally cased with slabs of granite, many of which still remain in
position. In the mummy chamber were discovered a stone
sarcophagus, a wooden coffin, the cover of which was inscribed
with the king’s names and titles and an extract from a religious text,
and the remains of a mummy wrapped in a cloth. These were
despatched by ship to England in 1838, but the ship was wrecked,
and the sarcophagus was lost; the fragments of the coffin and the
mummy were recovered, and are now exhibited in Case B in the
First Egyptian Room. In the reign of Men-kau-Rā certain Chapters of
the Book of the Dead were revised or composed by Ḥeruṭāṭāf, a
son of Khufu, or Cheops, who was renowned for his learning. A cast

of a statue of Men-kau-Rā, and a sepulchral stele of Khennu, a
“royal kinsman” and councillor of the king, are exhibited in the
Egyptian Vestibule, Nos. 30 and 31.
In the reign of Men-kau-Rā was born a child to whom the name of
Ptaḥ-Shepses was given, and who was a playfellow of the princes
and princesses in the palace. In the reign of the next king,
Shepseskaf, he married the royal princess Maāt-khā
𓌷(cid:0)𓂝(cid:0)𓏏𓈍(cid:0)𓂝,
and lived on through the reigns of Userkaf,
Saḥu-Rā, Nefer-ȧri-ka-Rā, and two or three other kings of the Vth
dynasty. Under each king he filled a number of important offices,
and at his death was probably considerably more than 100 years old.
He was buried in a fine large maṣṭaba tomb at Ṣaḳḳârah, from which
the great door in the Egyptian Vestibule, No. 32, was taken. The
façade is inscribed in fine bold hieroglyphics, and the sculptured
decorations on the sides are good examples of the best funerary
reliefs of the period. The upper parts of each of the main
perpendicular lines of text contained the name of a king, but of
these only two now remain.
Section of the Third Pyramid of Gîzah, built by Menkaurā (Mykerinos), showing the
extent of the portions removed.
PLATE XXI.
An Egyptian official of the IVth dynasty. Cast
of the wooden statue of the Shêkh al-Balad,
or “Shêkh of the Village.”
[Egyptian Vestibule, No. 35.]
The beauty of the statues of the IVth dynasty is well illustrated
by the painted limestone portrait statue of Ȧn-kheft-ka, a royal
kinsman, which was found at Dahshûr (Bay 1, No. 33), and the
headless statue of an official found at Gîzah (Vestibule, No. 34). The
standing figures of the Shêkh al-Balad (see Plate XXI) and the
Scribe are wonderful examples of fidelity to nature (see the casts in
the Egyptian Vestibule, Nos. 35 and 36). The finest bas-relief of the
period is that from the tomb of Rā-ḥetep at Mêdûm (Egyptian
Vestibule, No. 40); and the wall decorations of the ordinary maṣṭaba

tomb of this time are illustrated by the sculptured slabs from the
tombs of Ȧri (Egyptian Vestibule, Nos. 41-43), and Ȧfȧ, a steward
and head-gardener (No. 44), and Ānkh-ḥaf, the scribe (No. 45),
etc.
Fifth Dynasty. From Elephantine.
About.. 3566.
B C
The kings of this dynasty are: Userkaf, Saḥu-Rā, Kakaȧ,
Nefer-ȧri-ka-Rā, Shepses-ka-Rā, Khā-nefer-Rā, User-en-Rā
Ȧn, Men-kau-Ḥeru, Ṭeṭ-ka-Rā Ȧssȧ, Unȧs. The reigns of all
these kings, from a historical point of view, are comparatively
unimportant. During the reign of Userkaf a great development of
the cult of Rā took place in Egypt, and the worship of the Sun-god,
according to the form established by the priests of Heliopolis,
became dominant in the land. In the reign of Userkaf, or in that of
one of his immediate successors, the title of “son of Rā” was added
to the other royal titles, and, as the son of the Sun-god, the king
took a special name. Userkaf built at Abû-Ṣîr the pyramid called “Āb-
ȧst” 𓀆𓊨𓊨𓊨𓉴. Saḥu-Rā appears to have made a raid into Sinai, for he
is represented in a rock-relief at Wâdî Maghârah in the traditional
attitude of clubbing a native of the country. He built, at Abû-Ṣîr, the
pyramid called “Khā-ba” 𓈍𓅡𓉴. For an alabaster vase inscribed with
the Horus name of this king, Neb-khāu, see Wall-case 138, No. 58;
and there is in the British Museum also a cylinder seal inscribed with
his name (No. 48,023). The next important king of this dynasty is
User-en-Rā, whose name, as son of Rā, was Ȧn. He carried on
mining operations in Sinai, and probably suppressed revolts there
among the natives; but details are wanting. He built at Abû-Ṣîr the
pyramid called “Men-ȧst”
𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓊨𓊨𓊨𓉴.
From this, probably, came the
fine grey granite funerary vase inscribed with his name
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓈖𓄊𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓍺.
(See Fourth Egyptian Room, Wall-case 194,
No. 51.) Usertsen I, a king of the XIIth dynasty, wishing for some
reason to commemorate User-en-Rā, dedicated to him a black

granite statue, the lower portion of which is in the Egyptian
Vestibule, No. 48. On one side of the throne is the royal prenomen,
and on the other the nomen, which is repeated on the king’s belt. A
plaster cast of a stone statue of User-en-Rā is also exhibited in the
Vestibule, No. 49.
King User-en-Rā Ȧn, B. C. 3433.
[Vestibule, South Wall, No. 49.]
Ȧssȧ, the next king of importance, worked the quarries in Wâdî
Ḥammâmât, near the old high road which ran from Ḳena on the Nile,
in Upper Egypt, to a place near the modern Ḳuṣêr (Cosseir) on the
Red Sea, and the copper and turquoise mines in the Peninsula of
Sinai. He built at Abû-Ṣîr the pyramid called “Nefer” 𓄤𓉴. During the
reign of Ȧssȧ a development of trade between Egypt and the Sûdân
ensued, and an Egyptian official called Ba-ur-ṭeṭ succeeded in
reaching the “Land of the Spirits” and bringing thence a pygmy ṭenḳ
𓂧(cid:0)𓈖𓎼(cid:0)𓄔𓁌,
whom he gave to the king. The pygmy actually came
from the land of Punt, which tradition declares was the original
home of the Egyptians. He was employed to dance the “dance of the
gods” before the king. It seems to have been the custom in still
earlier times to import pygmies from the Sûdân, for skeletons of two
were found near the tomb of Semempses, a king of the Ist dynasty,
at Abydos.
Unȧs, the last king of the Vth dynasty, the Onnos of Manetho,
carried on the usual mining operations, and, it is said, built a temple
to Hathor at Memphis. He is chiefly famous as the builder of the first
of a very remarkable series of pyramids at Ṣaḳḳârah, the corridors
and chamber walls of which were covered with series of formulae of
the greatest value for the study of the Egyptian Religion. The
pyramid of Unȧs was about 60 feet high, and the length of each side
at the base was 220 feet; in front of its door stood a portico which
rested on granite columns with palm-leaf capitals. One of these
columns now stands in the Egyptian Vestibule, No. 50. (For an
alabaster vase from his mummy chamber, inscribed with his name

and titles
𓍹(cid:0)𓅭(cid:0)𓇳𓃹(cid:0)𓈖𓇋𓋴(cid:0)𓍺,
see Wall-case 138 in the Fourth
Egyptian Room, No. 57.)
The funerary reliefs of the Vth dynasty are very fine. Those worthy
of note are: a “false door,” from the tomb of Khnemu-ḥetep, a
councillor and libationer and an officer of the palace of Userkaf
(Egyptian Vestibule, No. 51); a portion of the façade of the tomb of
Neka-ānkh, a priest who ministered in the tomb of Userkaf (No.
52); a massive “false door” from the tomb of Ȧsȧ-ānkh, from
Ṣaḳḳârah (No. 53); a slab sculptured in low relief with a figure of the
royal kinswoman Thethȧ (No. 60); and a slab from the tomb of
Khnemu-ḥetep, a chief of Nekheb (No. 61).
Sixth Dynasty. From Memphis.
About.. 3300.
B C
The kings of this dynasty were:—
1. Tetȧ.
2. Userka-Rā.
3. Rā-meri Pepi I.
4. Mer-en-Rā.
5. Nefer-ka-Rā Pepi II.
6. Mer-en-Rā Tchefau(?)-em-sa-f.
Tetȧ, the first king of this dynasty, was neither a warrior nor a
great builder; and details of his reign are wanting. He built a
pyramid at Ṣaḳḳârah, the interior of the chambers and corridors of
which are covered with inscriptions of a religious character; it is
commonly known as the “Prison Pyramid.” Of the monuments of this
king in the British Museum may be mentioned a grant of land to
the god Khenti Ȧmenti of Abydos (Egyptian Vestibule, No. 74); an
alabaster vase from his pyramid, inscribed with his name and titles
(Wall-case 138 in the Fourth Egyptian Room, Nos. 59 and 60); and a

fine breccia bull, to which the royal names and titles have been
added in recent times (No. 61).
Rā-meri, or Pepi I, was probably the greatest king of this
dynasty. He worked the granite quarries at Elephantine, or Syene,
and in the Wâdî Ḥammâmât, and he established his power in the
Peninsula of Sinai, where he ruled the local tribes with a strong
hand. His reign was one of industrial progress; and trade and
handicrafts flourished throughout the country under his fostering
care. Under the leadership of a favourite official named Unȧ, he
despatched a very large army composed of men drawn from all parts
of the Sûdân, to put down a wide-spread revolt which had broken
out among the dwellers in the Eastern Desert called “the Āamu, who
lived on the sand.” Unȧ gained a decisive victory, and was promoted
to very high honours. Pepi I built a pyramid at Ṣaḳḳârah, the walls of
the chambers and corridors of which were covered with inscriptions
of a religious character; from this comes the fine alabaster vase,
inscribed with his name and titles, in Wall-case 138 in the Fourth
Egyptian Room, No. 66. (For two fine “false doors” from the tomb of
Qarta, a high official of Pepi I, see Egyptian Vestibule, Nos. 75, 76.)
Pepi I was succeeded by Mer-en-Rā I Tchefau(?)-em-sa-f,
who carried on the works begun by his father, and built a pyramid at
Ṣaḳḳârah, from which came the fine alabaster vase in Wall-case 138
in the Fourth Egyptian Room, No. 66. He was succeeded by Nefer-
ka-Rā Pepi II, who according to tradition lived to the age of 100
years. During his reign Egypt was in a state of prosperity, and there
was great activity in trade and handicrafts. At this time flourished
the famous official Ḥer-Khuf, who was the master of a caravan
which traded between Egypt and the Sûdân, which country he
visited four times. On the last occasion he brought back a pygmy
from “the land of the Spirits,” which King Pepi II bade him bring to
Memphis. Detailed orders were sent to the effect that the pygmy
was to be watched during the day so that he might not fall into the
water, and his sleeping place was to be visited ten times each night
by properly qualified people, for, said the king: “I wish to see him
more than all the tributes of Sinai and Punt.” Other prominent

traders in the Sûdân on behalf of the king at this time were Pepi-
nekht, Mekhu, who died there, and whose body was brought back to
Egypt by his son Sabben, etc.
Among the objects of the time of Pepi II may be mentioned a
portion of a doorway made by him at Abydos, and a sepulchral
stele of Nefer-Sennȧ, from his tomb at Denderah (Egyptian
Vestibule, Nos. 77 and 78). Among the priests who ministered in
the chapel attached to the pyramid of Pepi II was Heb-peri, whose
stele is exhibited in the Egyptian Vestibule, No. 79. The most
important monument of his reign is the maṣṭaba tomb of Ur-ȧri-
en-Ptaḥ, a royal kinsman and scribe, libationer, and councillor, from
Ṣaḳḳârah, which has been re-built in the Assyrian Saloon (No.
80). It is a good typical example of the tomb of noblemen and high
officials of the period. The painted reliefs are interesting, and are
typical of the wall decorations of tombs towards the close of the VIth
dynasty. The inscriptions show that both Ur-ȧri-en-Ptaḥ and his wife
were buried in the chamber beneath the maṣṭaba; the list of
offerings, some 90 in number, is exceptionally long.
Of the last king of the VIth dynasty, Mer-en-Rā II Tchefa-em-
sa-f, nothing is known.
The funerary art of this period is well illustrated by the stelae and
“false doors” of: Sennu (Bay 1, No. 81), Ptaḥ-ḥetep, a priest (No.
82), Erṭā-en-ānkh, a royal kinsman and councillor (No. 83),
Uthenȧa, whose “good name” was Penȧ (a very interesting relief,
No. 84), Ȧṭu, a scribe and superintendent of the “Great House of
the Six” (No. 85), Behenu, a priestess of Hathor (No. 88), and a
portion of a slab from the roof of a tomb, with flutings, which are
probably intended to represent tree trunks (No. 90). All these, with
the exception of No. 81, are in the Egyptian Vestibule. To this period
also probably belong the libation tanks, and tablet for offerings
of Ȧntḳes, Khart-en-Khennu, and Senb (Bay 14, Nos. 93-95).
Besides the larger remains of this period, the scarabs in the
Table-cases in the Fourth Egyptian Room should be examined.
Several of them are inscribed with names of the kings of the first six

dynasties, but it is not certain how many, or if any, of such scarabs
are contemporaneous, and for this reason they have not been
described in the preceding paragraphs. On the other hand, of the
fine collection of scarabs of officials, inscribed with their titles,
scores certainly belong to the period of the first half of the Ancient
Empire, and are of the greatest interest and historical value.
The monuments prove that between the IVth and VIth dynasties
the Egyptians lived in a state of serfdom, and that they regarded
their king as the owner of both their souls and bodies. He was the
very essence of God in human form upon earth, and his power was
absolute; even in the Other World his authority was held to be equal
to that of the great gods of the dead. The Pharaohs of this period
were masters of the Peninsula of Sinai, and of the Eastern Desert
between Egypt and the Red Sea; and the memory of the raid which
Seneferu made in the Sûdân probably induced the warlike tribes of
that country to permit Egyptian caravans to pass from Syene to the
Blue and White Niles unmolested.
At the close of the VIth dynasty a period of general disorder
appears to have set in, the chiefs of cities such as Suten-ḥenen
(Herakleopolis), Asyûṭ and Thebes contending among themselves for
supremacy. Of the history of this period nothing is known. According
to Manetho (version of Africanus) we have:—
Seventh Dynasty. From Memphis.
Seventy kings in seventy days.
Eighth Dynasty. From Memphis.
Twenty-seven kings in 146 years.
The Tablet of Abydos supplies after Neter-ka-Rā, the name of the
last king of the VIth dynasty, the following sixteen names, which
represent, presumably, the kings of the VIIIth dynasty:—

1. Men-ka-Rā.
2. Nefer-ka-Rā.
3. Nefer-ka-Rā Nebi.
4. Ṭeṭ-ka-Rā...
5. Nefer-ka-Rā Khenṭu.
6. Mer-en-Ḥeru.
7. Senefer-ka.
8. N-ka-Rā.
9. Nefer-ka-Rā Tererl.
10. Nefer-ka-Ḥeru.
11. Nefer-ka-Rā Pepi senb.
12. Senefer-ka Ȧnnu.
13.... kau-Rā.
14. Nefer-kau-Rā.
15. Nefer-kau-Ḥeru.
16. Nefer-ȧri-ka-Rā.
Under the rule of these kings the princes of Herakleopolis
succeeded in gaining their independence, and thus the seat of the
government of Egypt was removed from Memphis up the river to
Suten-ḥenen, the modern Ahnâs, about 60 miles south of Cairo.
Ninth Dynasty.
Nineteen kings in 409 years.
Tenth Dynasty.
Nineteen kings in 185 years.
The Turin Papyrus contains a series of fragmentary names, which
may represent those of the kings of one or the other of these
dynasties; the fourth of these is Khati, whose name is also found on

a rock in the First Cataract, and on a bronze bowl in the Museum of
the Louvre in Paris.
Among the kings of the Tenth Dynasty may be placed king Ka-
meri-Rā in whose reign lived Khati, prince of Siut, or Asyûṭ. About
this time war appears to have been going on between the princes of
Herakleopolis and the princes of Thebes, and the prince of Siut sent
troops to support the Herakleopolitans against the Thebans. For a
time the Thebans were beaten, but at length they gained the
mastery over the princes of the North, and founded a new dynasty.
Of the period represented by dynasties VII-X there are no
monuments in the British Museum, with perhaps the exception of a
few scarabs.
Eleventh Dynasty. From Thebes.
About.. 2600.
B C
The founder of this dynasty was, most probably, Ȧntefȧ, a local
chief of the Thebaïd, whose titles were E 𓂋(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓂝 and Ḥ 𓄂,
RPĀ Ā
and “great prince of the nome of the Thebaïd, the satisfier of the
heart of the king, the controller of the Gates of the Cataract, the
support of the South, making the two banks of the Nile to live, chief
of the Priests, the loyal servant of the Great God, the Lord of
Heaven.” He was probably succeeded by two or three chiefs of
similar name who made no claim to the sovereignty of the Northern
Kingdom, which was then in the hands of the princes of
Herakleopolis. The first of Ȧntefȧ’s successors who claimed to be
“King of the South and of the North,” and “Lord of the two Lands,”
i. e., all Egypt, was Uaḥ-ānkh Ȧntef-āa, who was succeeded by
Nekht-neb-ṭep-nefer Ȧntef, and he was followed by Sānkh-ȧb-
taui Menthu-ḥetep I. These facts are derived from the important
stele of Ȧntef, a priestly official, which is exhibited in the Northern
Egyptian Gallery, Bay 4, No. 99 (see Plate XXII). Among the
officials who flourished in the reign of Uaḥ-Ȧntef and his son was
Thethȧ, whose sepulchral stele, inscribed with a biographical notice,

is exhibited in the same Bay (No. 100). From his tomb also came
the inscription which formed the façade (No. 101), and the reliefs
(Nos. 102, 103), on which are represented members of the family
of the deceased bearing offerings. The order of the remaining kings
of the dynasty is doubtful. Several of them were called Menthu-
ḥetep, and they may be distinguished by their prenomens thus:—
Neb-ḥapt-Rā Menthu-ḥetep.
Neb-taui-Rā Menthu-ḥetep.
Neb-ḥap-Rā Menthu-ḥetep.
S-ānkh-ka-Rā Menthu-ḥetep.
The first of these kings, Neb-ḥapt-Rā Menthu-ḥetep, probably
Menthu-ḥetep II, appears to have been an able ruler, who reigned
for about 46 years. He was a great warrior, and established his
authority from one end of Egypt to the other. Among his other
achievements was the pacifying of the Āamu, or the tribes of the
Eastern Desert and Sinai. He built a fine temple at Dêr al-Baḥarî, the
remains of which have been recently discovered and excavated. This
building is unique in being associated with a pyramid-tomb. The
fragments of the painted limestone reliefs which have been found
among its ruins lack nothing in finish, fidelity to nature, and
execution, whilst in design and general treatment they may be
compared with some of the best funerary reliefs of the Vth dynasty.
In the Northern Gallery, Bay 3, an interesting collection of such
fragments is exhibited, and worthy of note are: Head of a painted
limestone statue of Neb-ḥapt-Rā Menthu-ḥetep, wearing the crown
of the South (No. 104); portion of a painted relief, with a figure of
the king being embraced by Rā (No. 105); relief, with a seated
figure of the king and his prenomen
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎟𓊤(cid:0)𓍺
(No. 106); relief,
with a figure of a king grasping an Āamu foe by one leg (No. 108);
relief, with a figure of a hippopotamus (No. 110); relief, with a
figure of a prince called Menthu-ḥetep (No. 111); slab, inscribed
Sma-taui, the Horus name of the king (No. 117); and a portion of

an inscription referring to the overthrow of the Āamu by the king
(No. 118).

PLATE XXII.
Tablet of Ȧntet, an official who flourished in the reigns of three kings of the XIth
dynasty, about B. C. 2600. Scene: A priest making offering to the deceased and his
three wives.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 4, No. 99.]
PLATE XXIII.
Sepulchral tablet of Sebek-āa, an overseer of transport, sculptured with scenes
representing the presentation of offerings, etc.
XIth dynasty, B. C. 2600.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 4, No. 120.]
To the period of the XIth dynasty may be attributed the following
interesting tablets and reliefs: Relief, from the tomb of Sebek-āa at
Ḳurnah (see Plate XXIII), on which are represented the
preparations for a funeral feast, the figure of the deceased lying on
his bier, etc. (Bay 4, No. 120). The cutting of the figures and design
is of a most unusual character; and for the general treatment of the
subject this stele is probably unique. Other tablets, probably
somewhat later in date, are: Tablet of Khensu-user, set up by his
son Seḥetep-ȧb (Bay 3, No. 121), tablet of Sa-Menthu (Bay 2, No.
122), tablet of Menthu-ḥetep (Vestibule, North Wall, No. 123),
and tablet of Mer-shesu-Ḥeru and his friends (Bay 2, No. 124).
The portion of a wooden coffin inscribed in hieratic with part of the
XVIIth Chapter of the Book of the Dead, in Wall-case 87 in the
Second Egyptian Room, belongs to this period; the text was written
for one of the Menthu-ḥetep kings.
During the reign of Sānkh-ka-Rā Menthu-ḥetep, who was
probably the last king of the dynasty, an expedition, under the
command of a general, Ḥennu, was despatched to Punt, by way of
the Red Sea. The object of the expedition was to obtain a supply of
ānti
𓂝(cid:0)𓈖𓅂𓈒(cid:0)𓏦,
or myrrh, which was largely used for purposes
of embalming. Ḥennu succeeded in reaching Punt, and in bringing
back large quantities of all the products of that remote country.
Details of the reign of Sānkh-ka-Rā are wanting, but with, or soon
after, his death the XIth dynasty and the Ancient Empire came to an

end. The length of the period which elapsed between the close of
the VIth and the close of the XIth dynasty is unknown. Some
authorities make the interval between the VIth and the XIIth dynasty
to be about 650 years, others less than 500 years, and others less
still.
The following monuments probably belong to the period which
immediately preceded the rise to supreme power of Ȧmenemḥāt I,
the first king of the XIIth dynasty: Black granite seated statue of
Menthu-āa, or Āa-Menthu, an Erpā and Ḥā Prince, son of the lady
Mert (Vestibule, No. 127); tablet of the lady Nefert-tu, set up in
her honour by her son Menthu-ḥetep (Bay 1, No. 128), and the
tablets of User (Bay 1, No. 129), and Ȧqer (Bay 1, No. 130). The
tablet of Ȧntef, son of the lady Qeḥet, or Ḥeqt, and overseer of the
king’s cattle and preserves of water fowl (Vestibule, No. 133), and
the important inscription of Ȧntef, the son of the lady Mait (Bay 4,
No. 134), and the Prayer of N-Ȧntef-ȧqer to Ȧnpu, lord of Sepau
(Vestibule, No. 135), are all interesting, and are characteristic
productions of this period.

CHAPTER XI.
MIDDLE EMPIRE.
Twelfth Dynasty. From Thebes.
About.. 2466.
B C
B. C. 2466.
Ȧmenemḥāt I, the first king of the XIIth dynasty, appears to
have ascended the throne after a period of anarchy, and, even after
his accession, the members of his own household conspired against
him. The king tells us, in his Instructions, how one night, after he
had composed himself to sleep, a number of armed men burst into
his chamber and tried to murder him. Leaping from his couch he
attacked his assailants, and put them to flight. (See Sallier Papyri I
and III, and the slice of stone No. 41 in Table-case C in the Third
Egyptian Room.) Ȧmenemḥāt drew up a survey of the country, and
set boundaries to each nome, or province, and he framed a set of
regulations for the supply of water for irrigation to the different
towns. Work went on in the quarries of Ḥammâmât and Ṭura, and
the king restored the temples at Tanis, Bubastis, Abydos, etc., and
founded a temple to Ȧmen at Karnak. He built the fortified palace of
Thet-taui
𓎁𓇾(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊖,
near Memphis, and a pyramid tomb
called “Qā” 𓈎𓀠𓉴, at Lisht. He invaded the Sûdân, conquered the four
great tribes there, viz., the Mātchaiu, the Uauaiu, the Satiu, and
the Ḥeriu-shā, and made himself master of their country as far as
the modern Korosko or Ibrîm (Primis). His reign was prosperous, and
in his time “no man went hungry or thirsty.” He associated his son
Usertsen I with him in the rule of the kingdom in the 20th year of his
reign.

B. C. 2433.
Usertsen I was a great builder, and he rebuilt, or re-founded, the
famous temple of Ȧnnu, the On of the Bible and the Heliopolis of
classical writers, the sanctuary of the Bull Mer-ur (Mnevis). Before
the temple he set up two obelisks, the pyramidions of which were
cased in copper; the one now standing is 65 feet high. He set up an
obelisk at Begig in the Fayyûm, and carried on the works of
restoration of the temples which his father had begun. In the 43rd
year of his reign he invaded Nubia, and compelled the tribes to pay
him tribute, which the official Ȧmeni collected and brought safely to
Egypt. Ȧmeni was despatched twice subsequently to Nubia to bring
back gold and other products of the Sûdân. The name given to
Nubia in the inscription which records these facts is Kash
𓎡𓄿𓈚(cid:0)𓈉,
hence the Biblical Cush, which does not, however,
mean Ethiopia in the modern sense of the term, but Nubia. Usertsen
I built a fort and a temple at Behen, the modern Wâdî Ḥalfah, and
appointed a “Governor of the South” to rule over Nubia, or the
Northern Sûdân. The old copper mines in the Wâdî Maghârah were
reopened, and new ones at Ṣarâbît al-Khâdim were also worked; the
king built his pyramid tomb at Lisht, and associated his son with him
in the rule of the kingdom a year before he died.
Among the monuments of his reign may be mentioned: A fine red
granite stele on which are sculptured figures of Khnemu and Sati,
gods of the First Cataract, and his Horus name, from Philae (Bay 5,
No. 136); head of a colossal granite statue of Usertsen I, wearing
the Crown of the South (Bay 1, No. 137); and a fragment of a
chalcedony vase inscribed with the king’s prenomen
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆣𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
(No. 67, Wall-case 138, Fourth Egyptian Room). Of his officials there
are the painted stele of Ȧthi, who died in the 14th year of the king’s
reign (Bay 3, No. 138); the stele of Neferu, the overseer of the
royal water-transport at Behen, or Wâdî Ḥalfah (Bay 3, No. 139),
and two stelae and a statue of Ȧntef, the son of Sebek-unnu and
the lady Sent. Ȧntef was a confidential servant of the king and
superintended the royal private apartments in the palace; he died

four years before his master, i. e., in the 39th year of the reign of
Usertsen I. (See Bay 1, No. 140; Bay 3, Nos. 141 and 142.)
PLATE XXIV.
Sepulchral tablet and seated portrait figure of Sa-Hathor, a mining
inspector in the Sûdân, in the reign of Ȧmenemḥāt II, B. C. 2400.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 1, No. 143.]
B. C. 2400.
The reign of Ȧmenemḥāt II was prosperous, but uneventful;
and no military expeditions of importance were necessary either in
the Peninsula of Sinai or in Nubia. There was a large colony of
Egyptians at Sarâbît al-Khâdim, and a temple was built there in this
reign to Hathor, the goddess “of the land of the turquoise.” The
search for gold was carried on actively in the Sûdân, under the
direction of Sa-Hathor, who tells us on his stele (Bay 1, No. 143;
see Plate XXIV) that he worked in the mining districts when he was
a young man, and that he made the chiefs wash out the gold; he
brought back turquoises and went to the Land of the Blacks, or
Sûdân, and collected the products of the country for his master. His
knowledge of stone working induced the king to send him to
superintend the hewing of the ten royal statues which he placed
before his pyramid tomb. An interesting event of this period was the
despatch of an expedition to Punt under the direction of Khent-
khat-ur, who returned safely with his men in the 28th year of the
king’s reign. In the third year of Ȧmenemḥāt II died the Erpā Sa-
Menthu, a royal scribe and overseer of works. He was born in the
reign of Ȧmenemḥāt I, and was appointed scribe, etc., by Usertsen I.
His sepulchral stele is a fine example of its class (Bay 6, No. 145).
Another interesting stele of this reign is that of Khenti-em-semti,
a royal official, and confidential servant and treasurer to the king; he
visited Elephantine and Abydos (Bay 1, No. 146). The official
Khenti-em-semt-ur was a libationer priest who ministered in the
chapel attached to the royal pyramid called “Kherp”
𓌂𓉴𓊖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏤
(Bay
1, No. 147). The door socket (Bay 5, No. 148), dated in the 30th
year of the reign of Ȧmenemḥāt II, comes from a royal building in

Lower Egypt, and the seated figure of Hathor (Bay 1, No. 149),
dedicated to the goddess by Seneferu, the overseer of the boats,
from Ṣarâbît al-Khâdim, dates from the time of the opening of the
new mines in the Peninsula of Sinai. The three dated stelae of
Ȧmenemḥāt (13th year), Seḥetepȧb (19th year), and Menu-
Nefer (29th year) are valuable examples of the funerary stelae of
this reign (Bay 1, No. 150; Bay 7, No. 151; and Bay 5, No. 152),
and the stelae of Seneferu (Bay 3, No. 153), and Sen-ȧtef (Bay 1,
No. 154).
B. C. 2366.
The reign of Usertsen II was long and prosperous, but
uneventful. Active labour went on in the turquoise and gold mines,
and the quarries at Elephantine were worked under the direction of
Sa-Renput, the Governor of Nubia. Usertsen II built a pyramid tomb
at Al-Lâhûn, of wonderful design and construction. It seems that he
developed trade in the Red Sea, and took care to keep in check the
tribes of the Eastern Desert. Classical writers call him “Sesostris” and
describe him as a great conqueror and traveller, but up to the
present the Egyptian monuments have not justified these assertions.
Among the monuments of his reign may be mentioned the stele of
Sebek-ḥetep, the boat-builder, and Tchaa, a palace official (Bay 9,
No. 155, and Bay 1, No. 156), each of which is dated in the 6th
year of Usertsen II, and the lower portion of a black granite figure of
Sa-Renput, the “Great Chief in Ta-Kenset” (i. e., Nubia), the “great
father of the King of the South, and the great one of the King of the
North.” Sa-Renput held many high offices at Elephantine and was
one of the greatest of the feudal chiefs of his time (Vestibule, No.
157).
B. C. 2333.
Usertsen III, who was associated with his father in the rule of
the kingdom, was probably the greatest king of the XIIth dynasty.
The principal events of his reign were the conquest and occupation
of all the Northern Sûdân. As a preparation for this work, he made,

or cleared out, a canal about 250 feet long, 34½ feet wide, and 26
feet deep, in the First Cataract, so that he might pass boats through
it to the south. In the 8th year of his reign he sailed up to Wâdî
Ḥalfah, and, passing on to one of the great “Gates” in the Second
Cataract, he built two forts, one on each bank, at the places now
called Semnah (west bank) and Kummah (east bank). He also built a
fort to the north, on the Island Gazîrat al-Malik, and others probably
on the islands in the Nile to the south. In fact, he occupied the
whole of the gold-producing country of the Northern Sûdân. He set
up a stele at Semnah to mark the limit of his kingdom on the south,
and caused to be inscribed on it a decree in which the Blacks were
prohibited from entering Egyptian territory without permission. Eight
years later he set up two inscribed stelae in which he vaunted his
own boldness, prompt action, and invincibility, and abused the
Blacks, calling them cowards, runaways, etc. He says: “I have seen
them, I made no mistake about them. I seized their women, I
carried off their men and women when I came to their wells, I slew
their bulls, I destroyed their grain, and set fire [to their houses].”
Usertsen III established a line of forts at regular intervals along the
River Nile between Elephantine and the famous rock called Gebel
Dôsha, and garrisoned them with Egyptian troops; and was thus
able to ensure the safe transport of gold into Egypt, where the
precious metal was required in ever-increasing quantities. He
repaired and added to many of the great temples of Egypt, e. g.,
Tanis, Bubastis, Abydos, Herakleopolis, Thebes, Elephantine, etc.,
and he built a pyramid tomb for himself at Dahshûr. Among the
monuments of this king and his reign may be mentioned: Three grey
granite statues of Usertsen III (Nos. 158, 159, 160) which were
found in the South Court of the temple of Neb-ḥap-Rā Menthu-ḥetep
at Dêr al-Baḥarî. These fine statues appear to represent the king at
different periods of his life, and in finish and execution they stand
unrivalled among the monuments of the period. On the plinth of No.
158 (Bay 1) are cut the king’s Horus name Neter Kheperu, and his
name as king of the South and North (see above, page 116)
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓈍𓂓𓂓𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
(see Plate XXV). Head of a colossal granite statue

of Usertsen III (Bay 1, No. 161); a portion of a seated figure of the
king from Ṣarâbît al-Khâdim (Bay 1, No. 162); and the lower
portions of two quartzite statues of the king (Vestibule, Nos. 163,
164). No. 164 was usurped by Uasarken II, of the XXIInd dynasty,
who cut his cartouches upon the pedestal. The building activity of
the king at Bubastis is marked by the granite slabs from that site in
Bay 23 (Nos. 166 and 167) on which is cut the royal prenomen. No.
167 is of interest, for here we see part of the prenomen of Rameses
II cut over that of Usertsen III. Of the prominent officials who
flourished in this reign we have the stele of Ȧn-ḥer-nekht, the
overseer of the granaries, dated in the 7th year (Bay 1, No.
168); the stele of Ȧmeni, who carried out certain works at
Elephantine in connexion with the king’s expedition into Nubia, dated
in the 8th year (Bay 3, No. 169); and the stele of Sebek-ḥetep, a
warder of a temple, dated in the 13th year (Bay 5, No. 170).
PLATE XXV.
Granite statue of Usertsen III, B. C. 2330.
XIIth dynasty.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 1, No. 159.]
B. C. 2300.
Ȧmenemḥāt III reigned about fifty years, and devoted all his
energies to improving the prosperity of his kingdom. Art, sculpture,
architecture, and trade of all kinds flourished under his fostering
care; and the remains of his buildings and inscribed monuments
bear witness to the activity which must have prevailed among all
classes of handicraftsmen during his reign. The mines of Sinai, the
Wâdî Ḥammâmât, Ṭura, and elsewhere were diligently worked, and
the king carried out large irrigation works in connexion with the
great natural reservoir in the Fayyûm, which is commonly known
by the name of Lake Moeris (from the Egyptian Mu-ur, or Ma-ur)
𓈗𓅨(cid:0)𓂋, 𓈘𓅨(cid:0)𓂋𓈗.
The circumference of this reservoir was 150
miles, and its area 750 square miles; its average level was 80 feet
above the Mediterranean. In Nubia also he appears to have

undertaken irrigation works, for several “levels” are cut on the rocks
near the Forts of Usertsen III at Semnah and Kummah, with the
years of the king’s reign in which they were cut. They show that the
level of the river during the inundation was about 26 feet higher
than it is at the present time. Ȧmenemḥāt III is also thought to have
built the Labyrinth, which Herodotus says (ii, 148) contained
twelve courts, and 3,000 chambers, 1,500 above ground and 1,500
under ground, and covered an area about 1,000 feet long and 800
feet broad. It was dedicated to the crocodile-god Sebek; and many
sacred crocodiles were buried in a place specially set apart for them.
Ȧmenemḥāt III built a pyramid at Ḥawârah, and he and his daughter
Ptaḥ-Nefert were buried in it. From the ruins of the chapel at the
entrance to this pyramid came the limestone slab inscribed with the
king’s names and titles exhibited in Bay 5 (No. 171).
Foremost among the monuments of this reign must be mentioned
the colossal grey granite seated statue, and the head, which
probably belongs to it, exhibited in the Southern Egyptian Gallery
(Bay 22, Nos. 774, 775; see Plate XXVI). The inscription on the
pedestal of the throne was cut there by order of Uasarken II, a king
of the XXIInd dynasty; but it is certain that an earlier inscription
existed, which was erased to make room for the new one. The
features of the face and the general treatment of the head resemble
those of all other extant inscribed statues and figures of Ȧmenemḥāt
III; compare the cast of the statue in the Hermitage at St.
Petersburg (Bay 2, No. 172), and the cast of a head from a statue
of the king (No. 172, in Wall-case 101, in the Third Egyptian Room).
To his reign also belong the famous sphinxes which were found at
Ṣân (Tanis) in 1861, and were for many years attributed to the
Hyksos, because the name of Ȧpepȧ was cut on a shoulder of one of
them. On the cast of one of these exhibited in the Central Saloon
(No. 173) are inscribed cartouches of Rameses II, Mer-en-Ptaḥ II,
and Pasebkhānut. Of officials who flourished in this reign we have
the fine white limestone shrine of Pa-suten-sa, from Mêdûm,
surmounted by the figure of a hawk (Bay 1, No. 174); the stele of
Nebpu-Usertsen, one of the king’s personal attendants (Bay 2, No.

175); the stele of Usertsen-senbu
𓄊𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓈖𓋴𓈖(cid:0)𓃀𓋴𓈖(cid:0)𓃀𓋴𓈖(cid:0)𓃀,
a veritable royal kinsman,
and a commissioner of the revenue, dated in the 25th year of the
king’s reign (Bay 1, No. 177); and the stele and altar of Sebek-
[32]
ḥer-ḥeb and Kemen, dated in the 44th year of the king’s reign
(Bay 3, Nos. 179, 180). The stele of Tati-ānkef (Bay 5, No. 181),
the son of Tenȧuit, is of peculiar interest, for it was found in Malta
(see page 220).
PLATE XXVI.
Head of a colossal seated statue of Ȧmenemḥāt III (?), B. C. 2300.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 22, No. 774.]
The reign of Ȧmenemḥāt IV was short, and monuments of his
reign are few. His name is found on the rocks in the copper mines in
Sinai, and on a rock at Kummah in Nubia, but details of his reign are
wanting. An interesting glazed steatite plaque, bearing his name and
that of Prince Ȧmeni, will be found in Wall-case 150 in the Fourth
Egyptian Room, No. 1.
Shrine dedicated to Osiris by Pa-
suten-sa, scribe, who flourished in the
reign of Ȧmenemḥāt III, B. C. 2300.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 1, No.
174.]
The last ruler of this dynasty was Sebek-neferut-Rā, the
Skemiophris of Manetho, and sister of Ȧmenemḥāt IV; her reign was
short, and her monuments are few. The most important is the
glazed cylinder-seal inscribed with four of her royal names,
exhibited in Table-case D, Fourth Egyptian Room, No. 134.
In connexion with the XIIth dynasty must be mentioned King Ḥer,
who may have been a son of Ȧmenemḥāt III, or of Usertsen III (see
his scarab, No. 37,652), and an Usertsen with the prenomen of
Seneferȧb-Rā, who is sometimes called Usertsen IV.
Sepulchral stele of Tatiankef, the son of Tenȧuit. Found in Malta.
XIIth dynasty.

[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 5, No. 181.]
The rule of the XIIth dynasty was long and prosperous; and art,
and sculpture, and literature flourished. The art of the period is
developed directly out of that of the Ancient Empire, but one of the
most prominent characteristics is an increased tendency towards
realism which is especially seen in the designs and workmanship of
small objects. The Scarabs of the XIIth dynasty are particularly
interesting and beautiful, and a splendid set of examples is exhibited
in the Fourth Egyptian Room. The sepulchral stelae of the period
are also very interesting, and many of them exhibit clearly the
transition stages between the “false door” of the maṣṭaba tomb of
the Ancient Empire and the stele, or tablet, which stood by itself in
the tomb. The British Museum Collection is rich in XIIth dynasty
stelae, comprising examples of every important variety. The
inscriptions upon them usually open with the formula suten-ṭā-
ḥetep,
𓇓𓏙𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪
which is followed by a prayer to one or more
gods for sepulchral offerings and for “glory in heaven, strength upon
earth, and triumph in the Other World.” Opinions differ as to the
meaning of the formula suten ṭā ḥetep. Some think that it is a prayer
to “the king to give an offering”; and others that it is a prayer for “an
offering like that of a king”; and many different renderings have
been proposed by Egyptologists. It is of course possible that, under
the IVth dynasty, the formula may have been a prayer that an
offering might be given by the king, for the king was regarded as the
equal of Anubis and Osiris and other gods of the dead; but it is
manifestly impossible that every man throughout Egypt could expect
the king to send him an offering at his death, and we are therefore
driven to conclude that the original meaning of the formula was
forgotten at a very early period, and that it was only prefixed to
funerary texts at the dictates of custom or tradition. If it had any
meaning at all in the later dynasties, it would probably be that of a
petition to one or more gods for the gift of an offering like unto that
made for a king after his death. Sepulchral stelae are also valuable
because they give the titles of the offices held by deceased persons,

and because they often supply biographies of men who played
important parts in the history of their country.
Among stelae and other monuments of historical value of this
period may be mentioned: Stele from the tomb of Khnemu-ḥetep
at Beni-Hasan (Vestibule, No. 182); statue of Ȧmenemḥāt, a
[33]
veritable royal kinsman, and master of the robes (Bay 1, No.
183); seated figure of Ȧmeni, inscribed with a prayer for offerings
(Bay 1, No. 184); stele of Nekhtȧ, a Ḥā Prince (Bay 1, No. 185);
stele of Ȧnḥer-nekht, chief clerk of grain supply (Bay 1, No.
186); stele of Ȧntef, an overseer of priests (Bay 1, No. 187); stele
of Sa-Ȧnḥer, a deputy keeper of the seal, with figures of eighteen
of his children and relatives bearing offerings (Bay 1, No. 189); stele
of the lady Khu, with figures of her two husbands and twelve
children (Bay 1, No. 190); stele set up to the memory of sixteen
persons and their mothers (Bay 2, No. 191); stele of Sebek-āāiu,
with hieroglyphics inlaid with blue paste (Bay 2, No. 193); stele of
Ȧmeni, of unusual style (Bay 2, No. 194); stele of Erṭā-Ȧntef-
Ṭāṭāu, a governor of the Sûdân (Bay 4, No. 196); and stele of
Ȧntef, with an inscription of twenty lines in which the deceased
describes his virtues and abilities (Bay 7, No. 197). As examples of
the wall-paintings on the tombs of this period may be mentioned the
slabs from the tomb of Teḥuti-ḥetep, a high official who flourished
during the reign of Ȧmenemḥāt II (Bay 2, Nos. 198-200; Bay 7, No.
201). To the same period, or a little later, belongs the sandstone
obelisk which was set up to the memory of an Egyptian official of
the copper mines at Ṣarâbît al-Khâdim in the Peninsula of Sinai (Bay
1, No. 202).
The other monuments of the XIIth dynasty consist of altars, or
tablets for offerings, of which a considerable number are
exhibited in Bays 14, 16, and 17. Among the altars of the XIIth
dynasty may be noted that of the Ḥā prince Usertsen, a
superintendent of the prophets, sculptured with figures of vases and
two tanks, and inscribed with an address to the living (Bay 17, No.
269). The altar is a rectangular, flat slab of stone, with a projection

which was intended to serve as a spout, from which the drink
offerings were supposed to run off into a vessel placed to receive
them. In the altar small rectangular tanks were sometimes cut, but
usually the surface was sculptured with figures of haunches of meat,
bread-cakes, fruit, flowers, unguent vases, libation jars, etc., and on
the edges and sides were inscribed prayers for funerary offerings of
meat and drink and for things which were deemed necessary for the
dead. The Egyptians believed that the material things placed on such
altars possessed, like animated creatures, two bodies and spirits;
their bodies were consumed by the priests and others, and their
spirits by the gods. Some believed in the transmutation of offerings.
We now come to a period, i. e., that of the XIIIth, XIVth, XVth,
XVIth, and XVIIth dynasties, which is full of difficulties. Not only is
the order of the succession of the kings of these dynasties unknown,
but authorities differ greatly in their estimate of the length of the
period of their rule. Some say that the interval between the XIIth
and the XVIIIth dynasties consisted of more than 500 years, and
others that it was less than 200 years. The figures given by Manetho
are as follows:—
XIIIth dynasty. From Thebes. 60 kings in 453 years.
XIVth ” ” 76 ” in 184 (or 484
Xoïs. years).
XVth ” Shepherds. 6 ” in 284 years.
XVIth ” Shepherds. 32 ” in 518 years.
XVIIth ” Shepherds. 5 (?) in 151 years.
kings
PLATE XXVII.
Granite statue of King Sekhem-uatch-taui-Rā.
XIIIth or XIVth dynasty, B. C. 2000.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 1, No. 276.]
PLATE XXVIII.
Stele of the reign of Sekhem-ka-Rā, a king of the XIIIth dynasty, about
B. C. 2000.

[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 2, No. 277.]
PLATE XXIX.
Memorial cone of Sebek-ḥetep, a scribe, who flourished in the reign of
Sebek-em-sa-f, B. C. 2000.
XIIIth dynasty.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 1, No. 280.]
The total of these years is 1,590 according to one reckoning and
1,290 according to another, but it is impossible to accept either, and
we must therefore assume that the total of 1,590 or 1,290 years
represents the length of the reigns of the kings at Thebes, and of
those who ruled in the Delta. In fact it is clear that, except at rare
intervals, between the XIIth and the XVIIIth dynasties a king of the
North and a king of the South were always reigning at the same
time in Egypt, and that neither was sufficiently strong to make
himself master of the whole country. The evidence derived from the
monuments seems to indicate that the power of the Theban kings
declined steadily at the beginning of this period, and that, as it
declined, the power of the nomad Semites from the east, who are
known as Hyksos or Shepherds, increased until the end of the
period, when the Theban kings became strong enough to make
themselves masters of the whole country. The names of a
considerable number of kings, who may be assumed to have reigned
during the XIIIth and XIVth dynasties, are known from scarabs and
larger monuments, but nothing is known of their reigns.
Of the monuments of the period in the British Museum may be
specially noted: Red granite seated figure of Sekhem-uatch-taui-
Rā, a king of the XIIIth or XIVth dynasty. This is a fine piece of
sculpture, and is unlike any other statue in the gallery. The body
lacks the heaviness of the statues of the earlier period. On the
throne are cut, in outline, figures of two lions placed back to back.
Above them are the signs sa ānkh 𓎂𓋹, i. e., the “fluid of life,” which
the king derived from Rā, the Sun-god (see Plate XXVII; Bay 1,
No. 276). Of interest also are three stelae of private individuals,
each of which mentions the name of a king, viz., Sekhem-ka-Rā

(see Plate XXVIII), with the Horus name of Sānkh-taui (Bay 2, No.
277), Sebek-ḥetep, with the prenomen of Khā-nefer-Rā (Bay 5,
No. 278), and Ȧb-ȧā (Bay 5, No. 279). To this period belongs the
axe handle of Sekhem-uatch-taui-Rā (Sebek-ḥetep) a king
(Table-case E, Third Egyptian Room, No. 104). To a somewhat later
period belong the interesting memorial cone of the scribe Sebek-
ḥetep, who flourished in the reign of Sebek-em-sa-f (see Plate
XXIX), of the XIVth dynasty, a unique object (Bay 1, No. 280), and
the royal inscribed green stone scarab, with a human face, set in
a gold plinth, which probably came from the tomb of this king at
Thebes (Table-case J, Fourth Egyptian Room, No. 195). Of interest,
too, are the royal stele of the little-known king Ȧp-uat-em-sau-f
(Bay 3, No. 281); the stele of Ḥetep-neteru and Teḥuti-āa, which
mentions another hitherto unknown king (Bay 4, No. 282); the stele
of Ptaḥ-sānkh, mentioning king Rā-Ḥetep (Bay 5, No. 283); and
the slab from the temple of Osorkon II at Bubastis, inscribed with
the name of Sekhem-khu-taui-Rā (Bay 23, No. 284).
To a great many stelae of private individuals, who flourished
between the XIIth and the XVIIIth dynasties, it is difficult to assign
exact dates, for very few of them mention royal names, and the
inscriptions cut on them afford no clue. Fine examples of the
transition period of funerary sculpture, stelae, etc., are: Stele of
Nebȧ, an inspector (Bay 1, No. 285); grey granite portrait figure
of an official of Athribis (Bay 2, No. 288); granite figure of Nefer-
ȧri, from Bubastis (Bay 2, No. 289); stele of Pai-neḥsi, the store
keeper of the gold which came from the Sûdân (Bay 7, No. 299);
stele of Ȧntef-Ȧqer-ānkh-khu (Bay 7, No. 301); stele of Queen
Mer-seḳer (Bay 9, No. 330).
The Hyksos.—Comparatively soon after the downfall of the XIIIth
dynasty, the Delta and northern parts of Egypt were little by little
occupied by a confederation of Semitic nomad tribes to whose
leaders, on the authority of Flavius Josephus, the historian (who
died about.. 100), the name of Hyksos or Shepherd Kings has
A D
been given. The word Hyksos is derived from two Egyptian words

Ḥequ-Shasu
𓋾𓈎𓀀𓏪𓆷𓄿𓇓𓅱(cid:0)𓏪,
i. e., the Shêkhs or Governors of the
[34]
Shasu, or nomadic tribes of the Eastern Desert, Syria, etc. It is
extremely unlikely that they fought for the possession of Egypt; and
we may assume that they migrated into the Delta, and that, after a
few generations, they found that their power and numbers were
sufficiently great to enable them to assume the mastery of the whole
country of Lower Egypt. The Hyksos, who had settled in the Delta,
adopted, little by little, the manners and customs of the Egyptians;
and at length their chiefs adopted the Egyptian language and
religion, and assumed the titles of the old Pharaohs, and became to
all intents and purposes Egyptian kings. They apparently worshipped
several gods, the chief of whom was Sutekh
𓇓𓏲(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓐍𓀭,
and him
they identified with Set
𓋴𓏏(cid:0)𓈜𓃩,
or Suti
𓇓𓅱𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓃩,
the old
Egyptian god of darkness and evil.
Granite lion inscribed with the name of Khian, a Hyksos king, about B. C. 1800.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 5, No. 340.]
According to Josephus the chief kings of the Hyksos were:
Salatis, who reigned at Memphis, and fortified the city of Avaris,
near Tanis, and garrisoned it with 250,000 men; he reigned 13
years. He was succeeded by Beon, who reigned 44 years, and
Apachnas, who reigned 36 years and 7 months, and Apophis, who
reigned 61 years, and Jonias who reigned 50 years and 1 month,
and Assis, who reigned 49 years and 2 months. Of the objects in
the British Museum which belong to the Hyksos Period may be
mentioned: 1. The famous Mathematical Papyrus (No. 10,058),
which was written in the reign of Āa-user-Rā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓉻(cid:0)𓂝𓄊𓋴(cid:0)𓍺,
or
Ȧpepȧ I; 2. A red granite slab from the temple of Bubastis,
inscribed with the name of Ȧpepȧ
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓀁𓊪(cid:0)𓊪𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
(Bay 23, No.
339); 3. A scarab inscribed Āa-peḥ, the prenomen of Nubti, a king
[35]
whose cartouches appear on the famous Stele of 400 years
(No. 32,368); 4. The granite lion (Bay 5, No. 340) on the breast of
which is cut the cartouche
𓊹𓄤𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋴(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
Suser-en-Rā, i. e., the

prenomen of King Khian
𓍹(cid:0)𓐍𓇌𓄿𓈖(cid:0)𓍺.
This lion was purchased at
Baghdad, but its provenance is unknown. Besides these the British
Museum possesses a large number of scarabs of the Hyksos
Period inscribed with the names of kings and royal personages.
Another Hyksos king, Āa-qenen-Rā Ȧpepȧ II, is made known to
us by Sallier Papyrus II (No. 10,185), which shows that he was a
contemporary of one of the Theban kings called Seqenen-Rā.
According to this document there was enmity between Ȧpepȧ II and
Seqenen-Rā, his vassal, but as the papyrus is mutilated the result of
their enmity is unknown.
During one portion of the Hyksos Period a group of petty kings, or
chiefs, each of whom was called Ȧntef-āa, ruled either at Thebes or
Coptos, and a few of their monuments have come down to us. In
the British Museum are: 1. Stone memorial pyramid of Ȧntef-āa
Ȧp-Maāt (Vestibule, South wall, No. 341); 2. Slab sculptured with a
figure of Ȧntef Nub-kheper-Rā (Bay 4, No. 342); 3. Gilded coffin
of Ȧntef-āa (Wall-case 2, First Egyptian Room).
It has been said above that there was enmity between Ȧpepȧ II
and Seqenen-Rā, but the monuments prove that there were three
kings who bore the Seqenen-Rā prenomen, and it seems that all
three waged war against the Hyksos in the north; their full names
were Seqenen-Rā (I), Tau-āa, Seqenen-Rā (II), Tau-āa-āa,
Seqenen-Rā (III), Tau-āa-qen. The greatest warrior of the three
was undoubtedly the last named, and it was he who determined to
throw off the yoke of the foreigner. He was supported by all classes
of Egyptians, for the Hyksos were hated, and especially by the
priests of Ȧmen-Rā at Thebes, who regarded the demand of the
Hyksos king that Seqenen-Rā III should worship the god Sutekh as a
grave insult to their god Ȧmen-Rā. Seqenen-Rā III refused to
worship Sutekh, and proclaimed his independence. Of the battles
which were fought during the war that followed nothing is known,
but it is clear that in one of them the brave leader in the struggle for
national independence was slain. When his mummy was unrolled at
Cairo, in 1886, it was seen that the lower jaw-bone was broken and

the skull split; there were also large wounds in the side of the head
and over the eye, and one ear had been hacked away. Tau-āa-qen
was succeeded by his son (?) Ka-mes, whose reign was, however,
short. To him belonged the fine bronze axe-head inscribed with his
names and titles exhibited in Table-case B in the Third Egyptian
Room (No. 5), and the spear head, similarly inscribed, of which see
a cast in the same case (No. 191). Ka-mes had several children by
his wife Ȧāḥ-ḥetep, and some of their sons may have ruled for a
short time; but the country was very unsettled, and the first to
succeed in restoring law and order was Ȧāḥmes, or Amāsis I, the
founder of the XVIIIth dynasty.

CHAPTER XII.
THE NEW EMPIRE.
The Eighteenth Dynasty. From Thebes.
About.. 1600.
B C
Under this dynasty Egypt formed her empire in Western Asia, and
conquered and occupied the Egyptian Sûdân, probably so far south
as the Baḥr al-Ghazâl. The Hyksos were expelled from Egypt by the
first kings of the dynasty, and the peoples in the Eastern and
Western Deserts were held in check with a firm hand. King after king
made frequent raids on a large scale into Syria and the Sûdân, and
on each occasion brought back untold spoils, a considerable
proportion of which was expended on the building of great temples
like those of Karnak, Luxor, and Dêr al-Baḥarî. Trade developed to an
unprecedented extent, and riches increased; and the king and his
priests and nobles were able to gratify their love of splendid temples,
colossal statues, lofty obelisks, large palaces, fine houses and
gardens, decorated furniture, elaborate jewellery, costly tombs, etc.
Under the patronage of the priesthood and the temple-schools
education prospered, literature, art, painting and sculpture
flourished, and the vast works which were undertaken by the
Government encouraged handicraftsmen of every kind in the
production of the best work. Among the kings of this dynasty were
the greatest and most powerful sovereigns that ever ruled Egypt,
viz., Thothmes III and Ȧmen-ḥetep III.
B. C. 1600.
The first king of the dynasty was Ȧāḥmes, or Amāsis I, who
carried on the war against the Hyksos which Seqenen-Rā had begun.

He captured the city of Avaris, the stronghold of the Hyksos, and
turned the enemy out of the country, and in the fifth year of his
reign he captured the city of Sharuhen (mentioned in Joshua xix, 6),
in Syria. He subsequently invaded Nubia and compelled the tribes to
pay tribute. Among the monuments of his reign are the massive
granite altar inscribed with his name (Bay 16, No. 343); the head
of a seated figure of Nefert-ȧri, his wife (Bay 12, No. 344); the
ushabti figure of the king (Wall-case 84, Second Egyptian Room,
No. 129); and the portrait of the Queen (Case 1, Third Egyptian
Room, No. 3).
Statue of Ȧmen-ḥetep I,
B. C. 1600, in the form of
Osiris, wearing the
Crown of the South.
[Northern Egyptian
Gallery, Bay 3, No. 346.]
Ȧmen-ḥetep I, the son of Amāsis I, continued the war in Nubia,
and the rebuilding of the temple of Ȧmen and other sanctuaries; he
was the founder of the great brotherhood of the Priests of Ȧmen.
From a building made by him at Dêr al-Baḥarî came the magnificent
painted limestone statue of the king, in the mummied form and
with the White Crown of Osiris, exhibited in the Northern Egyptian
Gallery (No. 346), and the stele on which are sculptured figures of
Neb-Ḥapt-Rā Menthu-ḥetep and Ȧmen-ḥetep I (Bay 9, No.
347). Other interesting monuments of this reign are: the stele of
Pa-sheṭ, a judge, who is seen adoring the king and queen (Bay 7,
No. 348); and a stele with figures of the king and queen (Bay 9, No.
349). The inscriptions and scenes on several stelae show that
Ȧmen-ḥetep I and his queens were included among the gods; see
the stelae of Ḥui (Bay 8, No. 352), Pa-ren-nefer (Bay 8, No.
353), Ȧmen-em-Ȧpt (Bay 10, No. 354), Ȧmen-men (Bay 10, No.
355), and Ḥui, son of Nefert-ithȧ (Bay 11, No. 357).
B. C. 1550.

Teḥuti-mes I, or Thothmes I, the son of Ȧmen-ḥetep I, made
Napata, at the foot of the Fourth Cataract, the border of his kingdom
to the south; and he waged war in Northern Syria. He added to the
temple of Ȧmen, and set up obelisks at Karnak. Among objects
bearing his name are two bricks and a steatite vase inscribed with
his prenomen and name (Wall-cases 150 and 175 in the Fourth
Egyptian Room).
Thothmes II, the son of Thothmes I and Mut-Nefert, married his
half-sister Ḥātshepset; during his short reign, war was carried on in
Syria and Nubia, and many temples in Egypt and forts in Nubia were
repaired or rebuilt. Among the monuments of this reign may be
mentioned the scarabs in Table-case D (Fourth Egyptian Room) and
a portion of a slab inscribed with his Horus name (Third Egyptian
Room, Wall-case 103, No. 937).
After the death of Thothmes II, his widow Ḥātshepset reigned
alone for some years, and she built the famous temple of Dêr al-
Baḥarî, the walls of which she decorated with reliefs illustrating her
Expedition to Punt. The temple was called “Tcheser-Tcheseru,”
i. e., “Holy of Holies,” and the architect was Senmut; it was built close
to the temple of Menthu-ḥetep Neb-ḥap-Rā, and was ranged in three
terraces. It was enclosed by a wall, and was approached by an
avenue of sphinxes, which led to the pylon at the entrance, where
stood two obelisks. She also set up two great granite obelisks in
honour of her father Thothmes I. About twenty years before her
death she associated her nephew Thothmes III with her in the rule
of the kingdom. Many scarabs, a gold ring, a wooden cartouche,
and an alabaster vase, inscribed with her names and titles, are
exhibited in the Fourth Egyptian Room (Table-cases P and J and
Wall-case 139).
Thothmes III, the son of Thothmes II and the lady Ȧset, was
the greatest of all the kings of Egypt; he reigned for about 53 years,
21 years as co-regent with Ḥātshepset, and 32 years alone. Soon
after he became sole ruler of Egypt he began a series of campaigns
in Palestine, Syria and other countries of Western Asia, and his arms

were everywhere victorious. In the first campaign he captured the
city of Megiddo, in Syria, and brought back an immense quantity of
spoil. Subsequently he undertook some fifteen campaigns into
different parts of Western Asia; and towards the close of his reign he
appears to have raided the Sûdân. The vast wealth which he drew
from Asia enabled him to be a generous friend of the priesthood,
and to repair, rebuild and enlarge and found sanctuaries for the
great gods of Egypt. He carried on extensive building operations at
Heliopolis, Memphis, Abydos, Denderah, Coptos, Dêr al-Baḥarî,
Madînat Habû, Hermonthis, Esna, Edfû, etc.; but his greatest work
was the colonnade which he built in the temple of Ȧmen at Karnak,
150 feet long, 50 feet wide, with 50 columns and 32 rectangular
pillars (see Plate XXX). He founded the temple of Ṣulb (Soleb) near
the Third Cataract, and dedicated a temple at Semnah to Usertsen
III. At Karnak and elsewhere he set up magnificent granite obelisks,
one of which, commonly called Cleopatra’s Needle, now stands on
the Thames Embankment. He was buried in the valley of the Tombs
of the Kings at Thebes; and his mummy was wrapped in a linen
sheet inscribed with the text of the CLIVth Chapter of the Book of
the Dead, and extracts from the Litany of Rā.
PLATE XXX.
The Hall of Columns in the great temple of Ȧmen-Rā, at Karnak.
PLATE XXXI.
Head from a colossal granite statue of Thothmes III,
B. C. 1550.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 2, No. 360.]
Among the many monuments of Thothmes III and his reign may
be mentioned: 1. The magnificent head, in red granite, from a
colossal statue of the king, found by Belzoni at Karnak (No. 360,
Northern Gallery; see Plate XXXI); the total height of the head and
crown is 9 ft. 5 in., and the width of the face is 2 ft. 7½ in. 2.
Massive granite monument with figures of the god Menthu-Rā and
Thothmes III in relief (Bay 2, No. 363). 3. Fragment of the obelisk
set up by the king at Heliopolis (Bay 12, No. 364); and a door jamb

from a temple of Thothmes III at Wâdî Ḥalfah (Bay 10, No. 365). Of
interest, too, are the cast of a granite sphinx bearing the name of
Thothmes III on its breast (Northern Gallery, No. 366); the cast of
the famous granite stele inscribed with an address to the king by
Ȧmen-Rā, in which the god describes the exploits of Thothmes III
(Central Saloon, No. 367); portion of a stele dated in the 35th year
of Thothmes III (Bay 11, No. 368); slab with scenes of Ȧmen-
ḥetep I and Thothmes III adoring the gods (Bay 12, No. 369).
Among smaller objects inscribed with his name may be mentioned
the glass jug, gold rings, razor (?), tools and weapons in
bronze, and bricks made of Nile mud, exhibited in the Third and
Fourth Egyptian Rooms. There are also the stele of Messnȧu, a
priest in his temple (Bay 8, No. 372), and the statue of Netchem,
who prayed to the royal Ka of Thothmes III
𓇓𓏏(cid:0)𓈖𓂔𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏠𓆣(cid:0)𓍺
(Bay 9, No. 373). To the joint reign of Thothmes III and Ḥātshepset
belongs the statue of Ȧnebni, the master of the armoury, which
was set up to his memory by his august master and mistress (Bay 9,
No. 374).
B. C. 1500.
Ȧmen-ḥetep II fought in Syria, and penetrated the Sûdân as far
as Wâd Bâ-Nagaa, about 80 miles north of Kharṭûm; he caused the
body of one of the chiefs whom he had slain in Syria to be sent to
Napata (Gebel Barkal), and hung upon the city walls to strike terror
into the Nubians. Of monuments of his reign may be noted: The
royal ushabti figure in diorite (Wall-case 84, Second Egyptian
Room, No. 7); the glass and alabaster vessels (Table-case H in the
Third Egyptian Room), and the axe-head in Table-case B in the
Fourth Egyptian Room; the stele of Ȧthu, second priest of the king
(Bay 4, No. 375); and the portion of the bowl dedicated by the
scribe Teḥutimes (Bay 12, No. 376).
The reign of Thothmes IV was short and unimportant. He made
one or more raids into Nubia, an expedition into Syria; and in the
first year of his reign he set up a tablet between the paws of the
Sphinx stating that the god of the Sphinx, Ḥerukhuti-Kheperȧ-Rā-

Temu, appeared to him one day before he was king, and bade him
remove the sand which had closed him in on all sides, and promised
him that he should become king if he obeyed. Thothmes undertook
the work, and in due course became king. His inscription mentions
king Khāf-Rā (Chephren) in connexion with some work (probably a
clearing of the sand) performed for the Sphinx. Among the
monuments of his reign may be noted the stele of Ȧmen-ḥetep,
an officer who accompanied the king into Western Asia and the
Sûdân (Bay 11, No. 377); and the stele of Nefer-ḥāt, overseer of
the works in the Temple of Abydos (Bay 8, No. 378). Thothmes IV
married a lady named Mut-em-uȧa, who became the mother of
Ȧmen-ḥetep III. The granite boat which was dedicated to the
queen as the counterpart of the goddess Mut, is exhibited in the
Northern Gallery (Bay 7, No. 379). For a portion of the head of her
seated figure from the boat see Bay 7, No. 380. Some think that
Mut-em-uȧa is to be identified with the daughter of Artatama, king
[36]
of Mitani.
B. C. 1450.
Ȧmen-ḥetep III, the Memnon of the Greeks, declared himself
to be an incarnation of the god Ȧmen-Rā; he reigned about 36
years. In the fifth year of his reign he marched into the Sûdân and
crushed a rebellion at Abhat, taking 750 prisoners. He subsequently
travelled in many parts of that country, and built a magnificent
temple there, near the modern village of Ṣulb (Soleb), which he
dedicated to himself as the god of the Sûdân. He made many
expeditions into Western Asia, and whilst there he enjoyed lion-
hunting on a large scale; on the large scarabs exhibited in Table-
case D (Fourth Egyptian Room) he states that he shot with his own
hand one hundred and two fierce lions during the first ten years of
his reign. His frequent visits to Western Asia enabled him to continue
the friendly personal relations with the kings and rulers which his
father inaugurated; and he married several of their daughters, e. g.,
a daughter of Kadashman-Bêl, king of Karaduniyash; a daughter of
Shutarna, king of Mitani; and a daughter of Tushratta, king of Mitani.

He also married a sister of Tushratta called Gilukhipa, who arrived in
Egypt with three hundred and seventeen of her principal women.
The greatest and best beloved of his wives, however, was Thi, who
must also have been of foreign extraction. Judging by the
appearance of the mummies of her father, Iuȧa and her mother
Thuȧa, which have recently been found, it seems that the former
was not an Egyptian, but a native of some part of the Eastern Desert
or Southern Syria, while the latter was a native Egyptian woman.
Their daughter Thi was a very remarkable woman in every way, and
it seems beyond question that her son Ȧmen-ḥetep IV derived from
her the monotheistic views which he held.
The Temple of Luxor, built by Ȧmen-ḥetep III, B. C. 1450.
The building operations of Ȧmen-ḥetep III were on a very large
scale, and extended from one end of Egypt and Nubia to the other.
He built the Apis chapels at Ṣaḳḳârah; at Thebes he built a pylon;
at Karnak the temple dedicated to the Theban triad, Ȧmen-Rā, Mut
and Khensu; in the Southern Ȧpt (i. e., Luxor), a temple to Menthu,
and a temple to the goddess Mut, from which come the series of
statues of Sekhet, a fire-goddess, exhibited in the Northern
Egyptian Gallery, Nos. 381-410. All these buildings were on the
east bank of the Nile. On the west bank he erected a great temple,
the Memnonium, and in front of it set up two huge statues of
himself which are generally known as the Colossi of Memnon (see
Plate XXXIII). The northern statue was said to emit a sweet, sad
note daily at sunrise, and for this reason was known as the “vocal
statue of Memnon”; the sound was never heard after the statue was
repaired by the Emperor Septimius Severus (.. 193-211). Ȧmen-
A D
ḥetep III also built a temple at Al-Kâb, and another to the god
Khnemu at Elephantine, and at Saddênga in the Sûdân he built a
temple in honour of his wife Thi, who was also probably worshipped
there, as the king himself was worshipped in his temple at Ṣulb,
which has already been mentioned.
PLATE XXXII.
Colossal seated statue of Ȧmen-ḥetep III, B. C.
1450.

[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 8, No. 412.]
PLATE XXXIII.
The statues of Ȧmen-ḥetep III, B. C. 1450, commonly known as “The Colossi.” The
statue on the right is the famous “Colossus of Memnon,” from which a sound was
said to issue at dawn.
The reign of Ȧmen-ḥetep III was long and prosperous, and his
kingdom extended from the city of Nî, on the Euphrates, to Karei, in
the Sûdân. He developed the gold mines of the Sûdân to an
unprecedented extent, and exported gold to the countries of
Western Asia. The monuments of this reign are numerous; among
them may be specially mentioned: 1. A tablet inscribed with an
account of the crushing of the revolt in Nubia in the fifth year of
his reign, set up by Meri-mes, governor of the Sûdân (Bay 6, No.
411). 2. Two colossal seated statues of Ȧmen-ḥetep III (see
Plate XXXII), from the Memnonium (Bay 8, No. 412; Bay 9, No.
413). 3. Upper portion of a colossal statue (Bay 6, No. 415), and
two heads from colossal sandstone statues of the king (Bay 4, No.
416; Bay 5, No. 417). 4. Head from the granite sarcophagus of
the king (Central Saloon, No. 418). 5. Grey granite column from a
temple built by him at Memphis (?). It was repaired by
Menephthah I under the XIXth dynasty, and about 100 years later
Set-nekht inscribed his cartouches upon it (Bay 7, No. 419). The
monuments of his officials are also numerous. The most interesting
are: Granite coffin of Meri-mes, governor of the Sûdân (Bay 12,
No. 420); stele of Sururu, a high official (Bay 7, No. 422), seated
figure of Kames, a king’s messenger (Bay 5, No. 423); a slab,
with cornice, from the tomb of Pa-ȧri, an overseer of the granaries
of Ȧmen-Rā at Thebes (Bay 10, No. 424); stele of Ȧpni, a master of
transport (Bay 11, No. 425); painted statue of Pa-ser, an Erpā,
from Dêr al-Baḥarî (Bay 13, No. 427); granite statue of Ȧmen-
ḥetep, an Erpā, from Bubastis (Bay 12, No. 428), etc. Of special
interest are the two fine red granite lions, which were found in the
ruins of a temple at Gebel Barkal, at the foot of the Fourth Cataract.
No. 430 dates from the reign of Ȧmen-ḥetep III, and appears to
have been made by him for the temple of Ṣulb; No. 431 was,

according to the inscription, made by Tut-ānkh-Ȧmen, a later king
of the XVIIIth dynasty, who “repaired the monuments of his father
Ȧmen-ḥetep” (see Plate XXXVI). The name of a late Nubian king,
Ȧmen-Ȧsru, is found on each lion, and it is possible that he may
have brought both lions to Napata from Ṣulb, and placed them in his
own temple. Stelae Nos. 432 (Bay 10) and 433 (Bay 9) are of a
most unusual character. No. 432 is a late (Ptolemaïc) copy, written in
hieratic, of the deed of endowment of the funerary chapel of
Ȧmen-ḥetep, the son of Ḥāp, the famous architect who built the
Colossi, dated in the thirty-first year of the reign of Ȧmen-ḥetep III.
No. 433 is inscribed with a series of addresses which can be read
both perpendicularly and horizontally. Among smaller objects
inscribed with the names of Ȧmen-ḥetep III and Queen Thi may be
noted the bronze menȧt amulet, stamp, vase, brick, stibium pot,
plaque, scarabs, etc., which are exhibited in the Third and Fourth
Egyptian Rooms.
Scarab of Ȧmen-ḥetep III, recording Scarab of Ȧmen-ḥetep III, recording
the names of the parents of Queen Thi. the slaughter of 102 lions by the king
in the first ten years of his reign.
[No. 29,437.]
[No. 12,520.]
Of the greatest importance for the history of this reign are the
Tell al-Amarna Tablets, a fine collection of which is exhibited in
Table-case F in the Babylonian Room. They consist of a series of
letters and despatches, etc., written chiefly to Ȧmen-ḥetep III and
his son Ȧmen-ḥetep IV, by kings and governors of countries,
provinces, and towns in Western Asia. Nearly all are written in a
Semitic dialect, and in the cuneiform character. They were found in a
chamber to the east of the palace of Ȧmen-ḥetep IV, in the city of
Khut-Ȧten, near the modern Tell al-Amarna. Among the royal
letters in the British Museum are: Draft of a letter from Ȧmen-
ḥetep III to Kadashman-Bêl, king of Karaduniyash (No. 29,784);
a letter from Kadashman-Bêl to Ȧmen-ḥetep III (No. 29,787);
letters from Tushratta, king of Mitani, to Ȧmen-ḥetep III (Nos.
29,792, 29,791); letter from Burraburiyash to Ȧmen-ḥetep IV (No.

29,785); letter from Tushratta to Thi, queen of Egypt (No.
[37]
29,794); etc. (see Plates XXXIV, XXXV).
B. C. 1400.
Ȧmen-ḥetep IV was the son of Ȧmen-ḥetep III and Queen Thi,
and reigned about 20 years. In his youth he became a warm
devotee of the god Ȧten, whose visible symbol was the solar disc,
and rejected the cult of Ȧmen, or Ȧmen-Rā, the king of the gods.
During the first few years of his reign he lived at Thebes, and built
there a Benben
𓃀(cid:0)𓈖𓃀(cid:0)𓈖𓉐,
or shrine, dedicated to Harmachis;
and it seems that this was regarded by the priests with disfavour.
The pretensions of the priests of Ȧmen were unbearable to him, and
he therefore decided to leave Thebes and build a royal capital
elsewhere. The site chosen by him was on the east bank of the Nile,
near the modern villages of Ḥaggi Ḳandîl and Tell al-Amarna. There
he built a temple to Ȧten, a palace for himself, and houses for his
officials. As the new capital grew, so the enmity between the king
and the priests of Ȧmen increased. This can hardly be wondered at,
for he caused the name and representations of the god to be
obliterated from the monuments. Having moved to his new city,
which he called Khut-Ȧten, he abandoned his name of Ȧmen-
ḥetep, because it contained the name of the god he despised, and
adopted the new name of Khu-en-Ȧten, i. e., the “Spirit of Ȧten.” In
his new capital he established a new form of the ancient cult of
Ȧten, as he understood it, in the temple Ḥet-Benben; and the new
worship was carried on with the forms and ceremonies which had
been in use in Heliopolis for some two thousand years. Incense was
burnt on the altars, offerings of all kinds were made, but no bloody
sacrifices were offered up; on certain occasions the king himself
officiated. The followers of Ȧten declared that their god was
almighty; and that he was the sole creator of the universe; they
ascribed to him a monotheistic character, or oneness, which
denied the existence of any other god. Their god was “One
Alone,” and different in nature from any of the other gods of Egypt.
It was the intolerance of the followers of the cult of Ȧten as

formulated by Ȧmen-ḥetep IV which made them hated by the priests
of Ȧmen-Rā at Thebes.
PLATE XXXIV.
Letter from Ȧmen-ḥetep III, king of Egypt, to Kadashman-Bêl, king
of Karaduniyash.
[No. 1, Table-case F, Babylonian and Assyrian Room.]
PLATE XXXV.
Letter from Tushratta, king of Mitani, to Ȧmen-ḥetep III, king of
Egypt.
[No. 8, Table-case F, Babylonian and Assyrian Room.]
The palace and houses of the new city were beautiful, and were
richly decorated. Art developed in a new direction, and was
characterized by a freedom and a naturalism which are never met
with, before or after, in Egyptian history. It sanctioned the use of
new colours and new designs. The reliefs and pictures of the king
prove that his features were unusual in character. He had a high,
narrow, receding forehead, a large aquiline nose, a thin mouth,
projecting chin, a slender neck, rounded chest, and his figure in
many respects resembled that of a woman (see Wall-case 105, Third
Egyptian Room, Nos. 213 and 214). Whilst the king was playing the
priest in his new city, and making arrangements for building shrines
to Ȧten in the Sûdân, his Asiatic Empire was breaking up. The Tell al-
Amarna letters show how rapidly the desert tribes began to harass
the Egyptian garrisons in Syria and Palestine, and to hem them in.
Ȧmen-ḥetep IV made no attempt to maintain his authority in Asia, or
to keep what his fathers had won in battle, and there is no record of
any military expedition during his reign. Shortly after his death Egypt
had lost her Asiatic Empire, his new city was destroyed, the cult of
Ȧten died out, and the shrine of Harmachis which he built at Thebes
was pulled down, and the stones rebuilt into the temple of Ȧmen.
Ȧmen and his priests had prevailed.
Among the monuments of this reign may be mentioned: 1. Base
of a statue of Ȧmen-ḥetep IV, inscribed with the names and titles
of Khu-en-Ȧten; his cartouche as Ȧmen-ḥetep IV has been mutilated

(Bay 13, No. 435). 2. Base of a statue inscribed with the names of
Khu-en-Ȧten and his wife Nefertith (Bay 13, No. 436). 3. Stele of
Ptaḥ-māi, inscribed with prayers to Ȧten and Rā (Bay 10, No. 438).
The Tell al-Amarna letters to Ȧmen-ḥetep IV will be found in Table-
case F in the Babylonian Room; the scarabs, rings, etc., in Table-
cases D and J; and a fine porcelain boomerang in Wall-case 150, in
the Fourth Egyptian Room. (For a rough outline drawing of Queen
Nefertith (?) see Table-case C in the Third Egyptian Room, No. 4.)
The last kings of this dynasty were Tut-ānkh-Ȧmen, Ȧi, and
Ḥeru-em-ḥeb; the first two of these married members of the
family of Ȧmen-ḥetep IV. Ḥeru-em-ḥeb was a wise and just king, and
his reign was long and prosperous. Of the monuments of these
reigns may be mentioned: the red granite lion inscribed with the
name of Tut-ānkh-Ȧmen (Bay 10, No. 431; see Plate XXXVI); the
stele of Thuthu, a steward of Ȧi (Bay 12, No. 439); the granite
statue of Ḥeru-em-ḥeb (Bay 13, No. 441), and the statues of
Ḥeru-em-ḥeb and the god Menu, or Ȧmsu (Bay 12, No. 442); the
stibium tube of Tut-ānkh-Ȧmen and his wife Queen Ānkh-sen-
Ȧmen (Wall-case 183, Fourth Egyptian Room, No. 23).
PLATE XXXVI.
Granite lion dedicated to Ȧmen-ḥetep III by Tut-ānkh-Ȧmen, about B. C. 1400.
[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 10, No. 431.]
PLATE XXXVII.
Seated statues of a priest, or high official, and his wife.
XVIIIth or XIXth dynasty.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 18, No. 565.]
The statues, stelae, etc., of the XVIIIth dynasty are numerous,
and many of them are of great interest as illustrating the perfection
to which art attained under the patronage of wealthy kings and the
priests of Ȧmen. Among them may be noted the following: Figure
and stele of Nekht-Menu or Nekht-Ȧmsu, holding a stele (Bay 2,
No. 443); figures of Ȧri-neferu and his wife Ȧpu (Bay 3, No. 444);
stele of Ȧmen-em-ḥāt, inscribed with adorations to Osiris (Bay 5,

No 447); granite figure of Kamesu, a scribe (Bay 7, No. 452); stele
of Pasheṭ, guardian of the northern lake and northern pillars of
Ȧmen (Bay 8, No. 455); stele of Nefer-renpit, sculptured with a
scene representing the ceremony of Opening the Mouth (Bay 8, No.
456); stele of Teḥutimes, captain of the guard of the city gate of
Memphis (Bay 8, No. 460); stele of Ḥeru-em-ḥeb a high official,
and two door-jambs inscribed with a hymn to the Sun-god (Bay 8,
Nos. 461-463); stele of Neb-Rā, on which are sculptured four eyes
and two ears
𓁻(cid:0)𓁻𓁻(cid:0)𓁻𓄔𓄔
(Bay 9, No. 467); stele of Ban-āa,
a royal scribe (Bay 9, No. 474); stele of Ḥeru and Sutui, twin
brothers, architects and clerks of the works at Thebes early in the
XVIIIth dynasty (Bay 9, No. 475); stele of Pasheṭ inscribed with
praises of the Syrian god Reshpu (Bay 10, No. 478); stele of Qaḥa
(Bay 10, No. 483); stele of Māḥu, captain of the king’s bow (Bay
10, No. 487); stele of Anna (Bay 11, No. 503); stele of Sebek-
ḥetep, scribe of the wine-cellar (Bay 12, No. 513); sepulchral
monument of Thuthu, with pyramidal top and libation basin
attached (Bay 13, No. 549); granite figure of Qen-nefer, a high
court official (Central Saloon, No. 556); three small inscribed
pyramids (Bay 18, Nos. 558-560); painted shrine of Ani, a
gardener (Bay 18, No. 561), etc. To the period of the XVIIIth
dynasty may probably be attributed the seated statues of a priest, or
high administrative official, and his wife in Bay 18, No. 565 (see
Plate XXXVII). This monument is undoubtedly one of the most
beautiful examples of Egyptian sculpture in the British Museum.
Here, too, must be noted a very rare object, viz., a complete
wooden door, from the tomb of Khensu-ḥetep at Thebes, on
which is cut a scene representing the deceased making offerings to
Osiris-Khenti-Ȧmenti, in the presence of Hathor, lady of Ȧmentet
(Vestibule, North Wall, No. 566).
Nineteenth Dynasty. From Thebes.
About.. 1370.
B C

Rameses I, the first king of this dynasty, appears to have
ascended the throne when he was an elderly man. He made an
attempt to enter into friendly relations with Sapalul, the chief of the
Kheta, or Hittites; and he seems to have raided the Sûdân.
Monuments of his reign are few (see the scarabs inscribed with his
name in Table-case D in the Fourth Egyptian Room).
The early years of the reign of Seti I, the son and successor of
Rameses I, were spent in fighting. He attacked the Shasu, or nomad
tribes of the Eastern Desert and of Palestine and Syria, and defeated
them with great slaughter, and advanced to the city of Kadesh, on
the Orontes, and conquered it. He returned to Egypt laden with
spoil, including cedar wood from Lebanon for making a new barge
for Ȧmen-Rā at Thebes. He made raids in the Sûdân, and forced the
natives to assist him in reworking the old gold mines and opening up
new ones. He reopened the copper mines in Sinai, and all the large
quarries, for he needed much stone for his buildings. He began to
build a great temple at Abydos, but did not live to finish it: the walls
and pillars are ornamented with religious scenes and figures of the
gods, and the sculptures and reliefs are among the most beautiful of
Egypt. In one of the corridors is the famous King List, or Tablet of
Abydos, which contains the names of 76 kings, the first name being
that of Menȧ or Menes. At Karnak he added 79 columns to the Hall
of Columns (see Plate XXX); at Ḳurnah (Thebes) he finished the
temple begun by his father Rameses I; and he built a splendid tomb
in the Valley of the Tombs of the Kings (see page 174). From this
tomb came his magnificent alabaster sarcophagus which is now
preserved in Sir John Soane’s Museum in Lincoln’s Inn Fields. Seti I
built a temple at Dulgo, near the Third Cataract, probably in
connexion with the gold trade carried on by the government; he
opened up roads to the gold deposits in the Wâdî Ulâḳî, in the
Eastern Desert; and he built a temple at Radassîyah on the old
caravan road which ran from Edfû to the emerald mines of Gebel
Zâbarâ, near Berenice, on the Red Sea; and dug wells at many
places in the desert. His reign was comparatively short, 10 or 15
years at most, and he was succeeded by his second son Rameses II,

whom he had made co-regent. Among the monuments of his reign
are: Large wooden Ka-figure of Seti I, found in a chamber in his
tomb (Central Saloon, No. 567); three painted slabs from the tomb
of Seti I (Central Saloon, Nos. 568-570); and a grey granite
clamp from a wall in Seti’s temple at Abydos, inscribed with his
prenomen
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏠𓁦(cid:0)𓍺,
(Bay 18, No. 572). Among smaller objects
may be noted the scarabs, glazed vase, and ushabtiu figures of
the king exhibited in the Second and Fourth Egyptian Rooms (Wall-
cases 78, 79, 150 and 152). A stele set up by him at Wâdî Ḥalfah in
the first year of his reign is in Bay 13 (No. 574), and the stele of
Rumā, a scribe and priest in his temple at Abydos, is in Bay 11 (No.
573). The beautifully illustrated Papyrus of Hunefer was written
in this reign (No. 9901).
Kneeling statue of Rameses II holding a
tablet for offering.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 17, No.
584.]
Ramessu, or Rameses II, the Sesostris of the Greek writers,
the son of Seti I, was associated with his father in the rule of the
kingdom at an early age; he was probably between 20 and 30 years
old when he became sole king of Egypt. He reigned 67 years, and
died aged about 100 years. He married many wives, among them
being some of his own near relatives, and was the father of about
111 sons and 51 daughters. During the first two or three years of his
reign he made war on the tribes of the Sûdân, and his victories over
them were commemorated by the rock-hewn temple at Bêt al-Walî,
near Kalâbshah. Reproductions in plaster of the scenes of the paying
of tribute to him are exhibited on the North and South walls of the
Fourth Egyptian Room. In the fourth year of his reign Rameses was
fighting in Syria, and so began the series of battles with the Kheta
and their allies which lasted for fifteen or sixteen years. In the end
neither side was victorious, and finally Rameses was obliged to make
a treaty with the prince of the Kheta, in which it was agreed that
Egypt was not to invade Kheta territory, and that the Kheta were not

to invade Egypt. The Kheta admitted the sovereignty of Rameses
over all territory south of the Nahr al-Kalb, or Dog River, near Bêrût,
in Syria, and the region north of it was to be Kheta territory for ever.
The most important among the long series of battles was the
Egyptian attack on Kadesh, on the Orontes; it was temporarily
successful, but it cost Rameses dear. During the struggle, Rameses
had charged among the enemy far ahead of his troops, who had
either been killed or had run away. When the king realized his
position, he found that he was surrounded by the foe, and was in
the greatest danger of being slain. Undaunted, however, he girded
on his armour, and in the strength of the gods Menthu and Bāl (Baal,
𓃀𓂝(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)
) he turned on his foes, and cut his way through
them, slaying large numbers as he escaped from their midst. “I
was,” said the king, “by myself, for my soldiers and my horsemen
had forsaken me, and not one of them was bold enough to come to
my aid.” This episode was treated in a highly poetical manner in a
composition generally known as the Poem of Pentaurt. As a
matter of fact Pentaurt was not the author, but merely the scribe
who made the fullest copy of the work known, namely, that in the
British Museum Papyrus, Sallier III. Thirteen years after the
conclusion of the treaty with the Kheta, i. e., in the thirty-fourth year
of his reign, Rameses II married the daughter of the prince of the
Kheta, whose Egyptian name was Maā-Rā ur-neferu.
PLATE XXXVIII.
Front of the rock-hewn temple built at Abû Simbel by Rameses II, B. C. 1330, to
commemorate his victory over the Kheta.
Rameses was a great builder; his name is found everywhere on
monuments and buildings in Egypt, and he frequently usurped the
works of his predecessors and inscribed his own name on statues,
etc., which he did not make. The smallest repair of a sanctuary was
sufficient excuse for him to have his name inscribed on pillars,
architraves, door-jambs, and every prominent part of the building.
His greatest works were: 1. The rock-hewn temple of Abû-
Simbel, dedicated to Ȧmen, Rā-Harmachis and Ptaḥ (see Plate
XXXVIII); its length is 185 feet, its height 90 feet, and the four

colossal statues of the king in front of it are each 60 feet high. In the
large hall are eight square pillars, each 30 feet high, each with a
colossal figure of Osiris, 17 feet high, standing against it. 2. The
rock-hewn temple of Bêt al-Walî at Kalâbshah. 3. The
Ramesseum at Thebes, called by Diodorus the “Tomb of
Osymandyas,” and by Strabo the “Memnonium.” The granite statue
of the king which stood before the second pylon was 60 feet high,
and weighed about 900 tons. He completed the Hall of Columns at
Karnak; added to the temple of Ȧmen-ḥetep III at Luxor; and set up
several statues of himself and two granite obelisks, each about 80
feet high. In the Delta he rebuilt Tanis, which became a city of the
first importance, and he built the city of Pa-Temu, the Pithom of
Exodus i, II, which is now called Tall al-Maskhûṭah; from the
latter place came the statue of the “Recorder of Pithom” (Bay 21,
No. 776). At Memphis, Abydos, and every important city of Egypt
and Nubia, he carried on building operations; and he dug wells in
Wâdî Ulâḳî, in the desert to the east of Dakkah, and worked the gold
mines there. His reign was one of great material prosperity, and he
lived long enough to carry out every work of importance which he
planned. He was not a great soldier like Thothmes III, or a great
administrator and diplomatist like Ȧmen-ḥetep III; and the glory and
power, and the territory of Egypt were not so great as in the days of
those kings. Few of the works carried out by Rameses can be
compared with those of the great kings of the XVIIIth dynasty in
beauty of design, finish, and solidity.
Façade of the Ramesseum in Western Thebes.
About B. C. 1330.
Statue of Rameses II, with the name of Upper part of a statue of Rameses II.
Mer-en-Ptaḥ I cut on the shoulders and Found on the Island of Elephantine.
breast.
[Central Saloon, Bay 14, No. 582.]
[Central Saloon, No. 577.]
PLATE XXXIX.
Upper portions of a colossal statue of Rameses II, B. C. 1330.
[Central Saloon, No. 576.]

The monuments of this reign are very numerous, and among them
may be noted the following: Wooden Ka-figure of Rameses II, from
his tomb at Thebes (Central Saloon, No. 575). Upper portion of a
colossal granite statue of Rameses II, which was originally
painted red, and was one of a pair that stood in the Ramesseum in
Western Thebes (see Plate XXXIX); weight about 7 tons 5 cwt.
(Central Saloon, No. 576). Colossal statue of Rameses II, on the
shoulders and breast of which are cut the prenomen and name of
Seti Mer-en-Ptaḥ (Central Saloon, No. 577). Statue of Rameses II
from Elephantine (Bay 14, No. 582). Kneeling statue of Rameses II,
holding before him a tablet of offerings (Bay 17, No. 584). Portion of
a statue of Rameses II; on one side of the plinth is sculptured a
figure of a favourite wife called Batau-ānth: from Ṣarâbît al-Khâdim
in the Peninsula of Sinai (Central Saloon, No. 587). With these
should be compared the cast of the head of a colossal statue of the
king which was set up before the temple of Ptaḥ at Memphis
(Central Saloon, No. 588), and the cast of another colossal statue
of the king at Abû-Simbel (Vestibule, No. 589). The width of the
face of the latter is 8 feet 9 inches, and the length from brow to chin
is 9 feet 8 inches. From the temple built by Rameses at Abydos
comes the famous King List, or Second Tablet of Abydos, which,
when complete, contained the prenomens of 52 of his predecessors
on the throne of Egypt (Bay 6, No. 592); from Athribis (Benha)
comes the granite lion (Bay 14, No. 593); from Abû-Simbel the
interesting pair of hawk-headed sphinxes (Bay 15, Nos. 594,
595); from Pithom the granite hawk (Central Saloon, No. 596);
and from Memphis the fist of a colossal statue (Bay 16, No. 597).
Of considerable interest, too, are the granite columns (Nos.
598, 599). The first is from the temple of Bubastis, and on it, in
places, are seen the names of Osorkon II; its total height is 20 feet
8 inches and its weight about 11 tons 5 cwt. The second is
monolithic and is from the temple of Ḥeru-shefit, the Arsaphes of the
Greeks at Herakleopolis; in places the names of Menephthah I
have been added. Its height is 17 feet 2 inches, and its weight about
6 tons 12 cwt. The altar of Rameses II is in Bay 16 (No. 600). In

connexion with the colossal statues of this period may be noted the
upper portions of two statues of Queens or goddesses, in the
Central Saloon, Nos. 601, 602. They were found by Belzoni at Abû-
Simbel, and most probably represent wives of Rameses II.
The art of the reign of Rameses II is illustrated by several small
objects bearing his name, e. g., the scarabs (Table-case D, Fourth
Egyptian Room); gilded vase for eye-paint (Wall-case 143, Fourth
Egyptian Room); a scribe’s palette (Table-case C, Third Egyptian
Room); a beautiful glazed bowl inscribed with the king’s names
and titles (Wall-case 151, Fourth Egyptian Room); model for a relief,
with a figure of the goddess Qeṭesh (Table-case C, Third Egyptian
Room); glazed boomerang (Wall-case 151, Fourth Egyptian Room);
bronze figure of the king (Wall-case 191, same room), etc.
Statue of Khā-em-Uast, son of
Rameses II.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay
18, No. 615.]
The statues and stelae of officials of Rameses II are numerous,
and the inscriptions on them supply much information about the
works and administration of the country. Thus we have: the statue
of Paneḥsi, the scribe and director of the storehouse of gold from
the Sûdân (Central Saloon, No. 603); the kneeling figure of Paser,
a Governor of the Sûdân (Central Saloon, No. 604); the stele of
Ȧmen-em-ȧnt, a scribe of the soldiers, who held several high
offices (Bay 11, No. 607); the stele of Setau, another Governor of
the Sûdân (Bay 17, No. 608); the stele of Ȧmen-ḥetep, a king’s
messenger (Bay 19, No. 610); the stele of Ptaḥ-em-uȧa, keeper of
the king’s stables (Bay 20, No. 611); and the stelae of Bakāa and
Nefer-ḥrȧ, who died in the thirty-eighth and sixty-second years of
the king’s reign respectively (Bay 19, No. 612; Bay 20, No. 613).
The inscribed statue of Khā-em-Uast (Bay 18, No. 615), a son of
Rameses II, is of great interest, both historically and linguistically.
Khā-em-Uast was a Sem priest in the temple of Ptaḥ of Memphis,
and a man of great learning, and he was held in high repute as a

magician. He managed the affairs of the country for about twenty-
five years before his death, which took place in the fifty-fifth year of
the reign of his father.

Statue of Seti II Mer-en-Ptaḥ II, king
of Egypt, B. C. 1266, holding a shrine
surmounted by a head of the ram of
Ȧmen.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 21,
No. 616.]
Mer-en-Ptaḥ, or Menephthah, was associated with his father in
the rule of the kingdom for about twelve years before he became
sole king. In the fifth year of his reign Egypt was attacked by a
confederation of tribes from Libya, and by certain peoples from the
northern shores and islands of the Mediterranean. Menephthah
fortified his towns and collected an army, and in the fierce battle
which followed he was victorious. The Libyan king barely escaped
with his life; but six of his brothers and sons and over 6,000 of his
soldiers were slain, and 9,000 were taken prisoners. It is probable
that the Exodus took place during the early years of this reign. In
the year of his victory he caused a Hymn of Triumph to be cut upon
the back of a stele of Ȧmen-ḥetep III at Thebes, and among the
peoples of Palestine whom he conquered are mentioned the
Israelites,
𓇌𓊃(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓂋𓇋𓄿𓂋(cid:0)𓏤𓌙𓀀𓁐𓏪.
His mummy was found in the
tomb of Ȧmen-ḥetep II at Thebes, and is now in Cairo. Like his
father he caused his names to be cut on monuments which he had
not made, e. g., the lion of Ȧmenemḥāt III (No. 173), the pillar of
Ȧmen-ḥetep III (No. 419), and a statue (No. 577) and pillar of his
father (No. 599). Among the monuments of his reign may be
mentioned the door-jamb from his temple at Memphis (No. 1169).
The remaining kings of the XIXth dynasty were:—
1. Seti II Mer-en-Ptaḥ. See his statue holding a shrine with a
head of Ȧmen (Bay 21, No. 616), a slab from his tomb at Thebes
(Central Saloon, No. 617), and a plaque and a scarab in the Third
and Fourth Egyptian Rooms (Wall-case 124 and Table-case D). The
D’Orbiney Papyrus in the British Museum containing the Tale of the
Two Brothers was written during the reign of this king. 2. Ȧmen-
mes, of whose reign nothing is known. 3. Sa-Ptaḥ, of whom many

reliefs are found at various places in Egypt. On his death a period of
anarchy followed, and nothing like order prevailed in the country
until Set-nekht, a relative of Rameses II, obtained supreme power.
The smaller monuments of the XIXth dynasty in the British
Museum are very interesting, and, though the work of the sculptor
and engraver is not so good as that of the XVIIIth dynasty, it is
important for illustrating the methods employed at a time when
quantity was more valued than quality. The inscriptions too are
valuable, for they afford much information on minor points of the
Egyptian religion. Among the statues and stelae of this period may
be noted: a finely sculptured relief from the tomb of Mes, a priest of
the K (Bay 17, No. 635); the stele of Ȧmen-Rā-mes, a priest of
A
the statue of King Mer-en-Ptaḥ (Bay 20, No. 636); the painted
limestone statues of Māḥu and his wife Sebta, fine work (Central
Saloon, No. 637); the granite figure of Rui, high-priest of Ȧmen
(Central Saloon, No. 638); the stele of Ptaḥ-mes, the comptroller of
the grain supply of Egypt (Central Saloon, No. 642); the stele of Pa-
ser, the scribe and master mason of all Egypt (Central Saloon, No.
643); the seated figure of Pa-mer-ȧḥau, a commander-in-chief
(Central Saloon, No. 644); the stele of the superintendent of all the
priests and all the gold workers of the Sûdân, from Wâdî Ḥalfah
(Central Saloon, No. 645); the stele of Qaḥa, a master craftsman,
on which are sculptured figures of the Syrian deities Kent and
Reshpu and Ānthȧt (Ȧnaitis), and the Egyptian god Menu, an
important monument (Bay 10, No. 646; see Plate XL); the stele of
the god Reshpu (Bay 17, No. 647); stele of Ḥeru, painted with a
scene of the worship of Kent, or Qeṭesh, Reshpu and Menu (Bay
17, No. 650); the stele of Ṭāṭā-āa, an overseer of scribes (Bay 12,
No. 652); the granite coffin of a high-priest of Memphis (Bay 17,
No. 654).
PLATE XL.
Sepulchral stele of Qaḥa, sculptured with figures of the foreign deities Kent,
Reshpu, and Ānthȧt, and the Egyptian god Menu.
XIXth dynasty.

[Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 10, No. 646.]
Twentieth Dynasty. From Thebes.
About.. 1200.
B C
We learn from the great papyrus of Rameses III that after the
downfall of the XIXth dynasty the land of Egypt fell into a state of
anarchy, every man acting according to his own judgment, and no
one holding supreme authority for many years. The country was in
the hands of the nobles and the governors of the cities who fought
against each other. This continued for some years, and then “years
of want” succeeded, and a certain Syrian called Ȧrsu
𓇋𓀀𓁹(cid:0)𓂋𓇓𓏲𓌙𓀀,
rose to power. Gathering his followers about him, he levied tribute
and seized the goods of the people. As he paid no honour to the
gods of Egypt and did nothing for their temples, they in due course
set him aside and placed on the throne Set-nekht, who brought the
country into order, and re-established the worship of the gods, and
provided the temples with offerings. His reign was short, and he was
succeeded by Rameses III, the chief event of whose reign of 31
years was the victory of the Egyptians over a confederation of
peoples from Philistia, Cyprus, Crete, and the northern shores of the
Mediterranean, who attacked Egypt by land and sea. Rameses III
collected an army and a fleet, and in the battle which followed on
the coast of Southern Palestine, his forces were victorious.
Multitudes of the enemy were slain on land, and those who
succeeded in reaching their ships could not escape, for the fleet of
the Egyptians hemmed them in, and a great slaughter ensued.
Rameses then marched through Syria, and having collected much
spoil, returned to Egypt. Soon afterwards the Libyans attacked Egypt
on the west, but they were quickly defeated and spoiled.
Rameses appears to have kept one fleet in the Mediterranean and
one in the Red Sea, for trading purposes, and this “sea-power” was
probably the source of the great material prosperity of Egypt under
his reign. The peace and security of the country were such that he

could boast: “I made it possible for an Egyptian woman to walk with
a bold and free step whithersoever she pleased, and no man or
woman among the people of the land would molest her.” Rameses
built the so-called “Pavilion” and the great Temple of Madînat Habû
at Thebes, and a small palace at Tell al-Yahûdîyyah (see the glazed
tiles, etc., from it in the Fourth Egyptian Room), and he richly
endowed the temples of Heliopolis, Memphis, and Thebes, and gave
[38]
them gifts of an almost incredible amount. Lists of all his
benefactions and a valuable summary of his reign are preserved in
the great Papyrus of Rameses III, the longest Egyptian papyrus
in the world (see page 74). Among the monuments and small
objects bearing his name may be mentioned: The base of a pillar
from a shrine of Rameses III (Bay 18, No. 716); a slab from one
of his buildings at Ṣaḳḳârah (Central Saloon, No. 717); and the royal
ushabtiu figures (Wall-case 85, Second Egyptian Room, Nos. 12,
13).
On the death of Rameses III the power of Egypt began rapidly to
decline, and the succeeding kings of the dynasty, each of whom bore
the name of Rameses, found their authority more and more usurped
by the high-priests of Ȧmen, the great god of Thebes. Among the
objects inscribed with the name of Rameses IV are scarabs
(Table-case D, Fourth Egyptian Room), a fragment of an alabaster
vase (Wall-case 137, same room), and the stele of Ḥeru-ȧ, a royal
scribe (Bay 24, No. 719).
Under the rule of Rameses V-VIII the people of Thebes became
poor, and the living were driven to plunder the tombs of kings and
queens for the sake of the gold ornaments on the mummies and in
the coffins. Under Rameses IX the government undertook a
prosecution of the principal thieves, and appointed a commission to
report upon the extent of the robberies of the royal tombs. Part
of the statement of the examination of the tombs is preserved in the
Abbott Papyrus in the British Museum (No. 10,221). During the
course of the enquiry a number of the accused were beaten on the
hands and feet, and confessed to breaking into the tombs of Sebek-

em-sa-f and queen Nub-khā-s. In the reign of Rameses IX, the
high-priest of Ȧmen, called Ȧmen-ḥetep, held great power, and
induced the king to authorize him to levy taxes on the people for the
maintenance of his temple and priesthood. Under Rameses X
further prosecutions of the tomb robbers took place, but the
government was powerless to stop the depredations. Rameses XI
and Rameses XII were weaker than their predecessors, and
allowed the high-priest of Ȧmen to rule the country. On the death of
Rameses XII, the high-priest, Ḥer-Ḥeru, seized the supreme power,
and assumed all the titles and functions of the king of Egypt. But the
priests of Ȧmen were as little able to maintain the power of Egypt as
the kings Rameses, and they could not make their authority effective
even in the Delta, or Northern Egypt. Thus it fell out that Egypt
became once more divided into two kingdoms, viz., the Kingdom of
the North, ruled from Tanis by Nessu-ba-neb-Ṭeṭ, whose name
was Graecized by Manetho under the form of Smendes, and the
Kingdom of the South, ruled from Thebes by Ḥer-Ḥeru, the first of
the priest-kings of Egypt. For some years, however, Smendes must
have been king of all Egypt, for when repairs of an urgent character
were needed for the temples of Thebes, it was he who had the
quarries opened, and collected the workmen, and directed the
building operations which saved one of the temples from falling
down.
The monuments of the XXth dynasty are characterized by
coarseness of work and lack of finish, but the inscriptions on them
are of considerable value linguistically. Among large objects may be
mentioned the granite coffin of Setau, a governor of the Sûdân
(Bay 19, No. 720); the libation basin (Bay 19, No. 722); the
seated figures of Ȧmen-Rā and Mut (Bay 18, No. 728); the stele
of Pai, comptroller of a chief queen (Bay 22, No. 752); and the
shrine of Ȧmen-em-ḥeb, a scribe of the king’s bowmen (Bay 17,
No. 754).
Twenty-First Dynasty.

.. 1050 (?)
B C
KINGS OF TANIS.
Nessu-ba-neb-Ṭeṭ (Smendes).
Pasebkhānut I.
Ȧmen-em-Ȧpt.
Sa-Ȧmen.
Pasebkhānut II.
PRIEST-KINGS OF THEBES.
Ḥer-Ḥeru.
Paiānkh.
Painetchem I.
Painetchem II.
Masaherth.
Men-kheper-Rā.
Painetchem III.
The reigns of all these kings are historically of little importance. As
soon as Ḥer-Ḥeru had proclaimed himself king at Thebes, he
assumed a series of titles indicating that he was the temporal as well
as spiritual head of Egypt. One of the chief works carried out by the
priest-kings was in connexion with the repair and removal of the
royal mummies from their tombs to places of safety. The
mummies of Seti I and Rameses II were removed from tomb to
tomb, but the pillaging continued, and we read that many of the
royal mummies required to be repaired, re-swathed, and provided
with new coffins. The rule of the priest-kings was not successful, and
several serious riots seem to have occurred at Thebes through their
neglect of the temporal affairs of the country. One of the most
important objects of the reign of Ḥer-Ḥeru is the copy of the Book

of the Dead which was written for his wife Queen Netchemet; an
important portion of it was presented to the British Museum by H
IS
M K in 1903, and this is exhibited in the Southern
AJESTY THE ING
Egyptian Gallery, No. 758 (see Plates I and XLI). The vignettes are
very fine examples of the work of the period, and the texts contain
interesting hymns to Rā and Osiris, and a valuable version of one of
the most important sections of the Book of the Dead, viz., Chapter
XVII. This papyrus was found at Thebes. A number of ushabtiu
figures, inscribed with the names of Nesi-Khensu, Ḥent-taui, the
Painetchems, Maāt-ka-Rā, and other members of the families of
the priest-kings, will be found in Wall-cases 153, 154, in the Fourth
Egyptian Room. The largest monument of this dynasty in the British
Museum is a lintel from a temple of Sa-Ȧmen at Memphis (No.
1170). In the First Egyptian Room are exhibited several very fine
mummies and coffins belonging to the period of this dynasty, and in
the Second Room several typical examples of ushabtiu figures and
boxes, which illustrate the funerary art of the period. The
monuments of the Tanite kings are few and unimportant.
The history of the next two hundred and fifty years (.. 1050-
B C
800) is full of difficulty. When the rule of the priest-kings of Thebes
came to an end the Kingdom of the South appears to have passed
into the hands of a series of weak and incapable men, not one of
whom succeeded in making himself “King of the South and North.”
On the death of the last Tanite king of the XXIst dynasty (about..
B C
950), the Kingdom of the North was seized by Shashanq, a
descendant of a Libyan chief, who established his seat of power at
Bubastis. He and his descendants formed the XXIInd dynasty, which
lasted till about.. 760. About this time the priests of Ȧmen
B C
departed from Thebes to Nubia, and soon afterwards the supreme
power in the North was seized by local chiefs dwelling at Tanis
(XXIIIrd dynasty), who made a league with all the feudal lords in the
Delta, with the view of taking possession of the whole country.
When news of this reached Piānkhi, king of Nubia, he forthwith
invaded Egypt and conquered it. After his return to Nubia, a Nubian
dynasty was established at Thebes, and a local chief of Saïs became

King of the North, about.. 733. He represents the XXIVth dynasty.
B C
The kings of the XXVth dynasty (about.. 700) were Nubians, and
B C
the kings of the XXVIth dynasty were descendants of the chiefs of
Saïs who were conquered by the Nubian king Piānkhi, about..
B C
740.
PLATE XLI.
Vignettes from the Papyrus of Queen Netchemet.
Ḥer-Ḥeru and Netchemet praying. The rising sun on the horizon. The Ape-gods
and Isis and Nephthys adoring the rising sun.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, No. 758.]
Presented by His Majesty the King, 1903.
Twenty-Second Dynasty. From Bubastis.
About.. 950.
B C
The first king of this dynasty was Shashanq I, the Shishak of I
Kings xiv, 25; 2 Chronicles xii, 5, 7, 9. He was of Libyan extraction,
being descended from Buiu-uaua
𓃀𓅱𓇌𓅱𓍯𓄿𓊕(cid:0)𓏮𓀭
a Libyan prince,
who flourished about.. 1150, and one of whose descendants
B C
married Meḥt-en-usekht, high-priestess of Ȧmen, and became the
father of Nemareth, who in his turn became the father of Shashanq.
A daughter of Nemareth owned the inlaid gold bracelets exhibited
in Table-case J in the Fourth Egyptian Room (Nos. 134, 135). The
principal event in the reign of Shashanq was the invasion of
Palestine and capture of Jerusalem. He spoiled the Temple, and
carried off much gold and silver, and took away the bucklers and
shields of Solomon, and also the golden quivers which David had
taken from the king of Zobah. He gave Jeroboam, king of Judah, one
of his daughters to wife. On his return to Egypt he caused a record
of this campaign to be cut upon the second pylon of the Temple of
Karnak, and added a list of all the towns and villages which he had
conquered in Palestine. Among them are the names of many places
familiar from the Bible narrative, but the statement that “the king of
Judah” is mentioned is incorrect. Shashanq repaired the Temple of

Mut at Thebes, and set up in it a number of seated granite statues
of the goddess Sekhet, two fine examples of which, inscribed with
the king’s names and titles, are exhibited in the Southern Egyptian
Gallery, Nos. 763, 764. A son of Shashanq named Ȧuputh was
viceroy of the South, to whom is due the removal of the royal
mummies from their tombs to the tomb of Ȧst-em-khebit at Dêr al-
Baḥarî, where, together with the coffins and funerary furniture,
they were secreted, the pit being filled up with sand, stones, etc.,
and the entrance carefully walled up. This hiding place remained
intact until 1872, when it was discovered accidentally by the Arabs.
(For the inscribed base of a statue of Ȧuputh, see Bay 19, No.
765.)
Seated figure of Ānkh-renp-nefer,
the “Good Recorder” of the town
of Pithom, who flourished in the
reign of Osorkon II, about B. C.
900.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay
21, No. 776.]
Another son of Shashanq I, named Uasarken, or Osorkon I,
became king of Egypt, and married Tasheṭ-Khensu, and Maāt-ka-Rā,
the daughter of Pasebkhānut II, the last of the Tanite kings of the
XXIst dynasty. The son of Osorkon I and Maāt-ka-Rā was called
Shashanq, and was made high priest of Ȧmen; he dedicated to the
god the fine quartzite statue of Ḥāpi, the Nile-god, exhibited in the
Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 22, No. 766. Osorkon I was
succeeded by Thekeleth I, who was succeeded by Osorkon II,
famous for the works which he carried out in the Temple of Bast, the
great goddess of Bubastis, the Pibeseth of the Bible. From this site
came many important monuments, among which may be
mentioned: The massive granite Hathor-headed capital of a pillar
(see Plate XLII; Bay 16, No. 768); and the slabs sculptured with
figures of Osorkon II and Bast, and figures of Osorkon II and his
Queen Karāmā (Bay 23, No. 769). Osorkon II perpetuated the
names of the great kings his predecessors, and accordingly we find

on granite slabs from his temple the names of Khufu, Khāfrā, etc.,
and figures of Ȧmen-ḥetep II, Seti I, etc. (Bay 23, Nos. 771-
773). Like Rameses II, Mer-en-Ptaḥ, and other kings, Osorkon II
caused his name to be cut upon monuments of other kings, e. g., the
statue of Usertsen III (Vestibule, No. 163) and the grey granite
statue of Ȧmenemḥāt III (Bay 20, No. 775). In his reign flourished
the good recorder of Pithom, whose statue (Bay 21, No. 776)
was found at Pithom. The reigns of the other kings of this dynasty,
Shashanq II, Thekeleth II, Shashanq III, Pamȧi, and Shashanq IV
were unimportant.
PLATE XLII.
Hathor-headed capital from the temple of Osorkon II at Bubastis.
XXIInd dynasty, B. C. 866.
[Central Saloon, No. 768.]
Twenty-Third Dynasty. From Tanis... 766.
B C
The principal kings of this dynasty were Peṭā-Bast and Osorkon
III, who reigned in the Delta.
It seems that a short time before the reign of Peṭā-Bast, the
priests of Ȧmen had found it impossible to maintain their position at
Thebes, and therefore, having hidden the mummies and coffins of
the members of their order in a secret place, which was not
discovered until 1892, they retreated to the South and settled at
Napata, a city at the foot of the Fourth Cataract. (For examples of
the coffins of the priests of Ȧmen of this period, see First Egyptian
Room, Wall-cases 11-15.) A few years after their arrival, they appear
to have persuaded Piānkhi, the king of the Northern Sûdân, to
invade Egypt and to seize the kingdom of the South at least, to
which, in view of the close relationship of the governing powers at
Napata with those at Thebes, he might be assumed to have a just
claim. For some time Piānkhi did nothing, but at length, in the
twenty-first year of his reign, hearing that all the princes of the

Northern Kingdom had united their forces, and were attempting to
seize the country, he ordered his army to advance into Egypt. In a
very short time great successes were reported. Thereupon he joined
his troops, and his progress was victorious and rapid. City after city
fell before his attack, and on the capture of Memphis, Egypt lay
vanquished at his feet. The governors came in one after another,
and at length Tafnekht, their leader, sent in his submission
accompanied by gifts. Piānkhi filled his boats with spoil and returned
to Napata, where he built a great temple to Ȧmen, and set up a
stele recording his victories. (For a cast of the stele see Central
Saloon, No. 793.) After Piānkhi’s return to Nubia, Osorkon III,
perhaps with Thekeleth III as co-regent, reigned at Thebes. To the
latter half of this dynasty probably belongs the stele of Prince
Ȧuuaruath, son of Osorkon and high-priest of Ȧmen (Bay 22, No.
777), and the monument mentioning a king with the Horus name of
Ka-nekht-khā-em-Uast (Bay 21, No. 778).
Twenty-Fourth Dynasty. From Saïs.
The principal king of this dynasty was Bakenrenef, the
Bocchoris of the Greeks, the son of Tafnekht of Saïs. His reign was
short, but tradition assert that he was one of the six great law-givers
of Egypt. About this time a Nubian called Kashta ruled at Thebes,
and married Shep-en-Ȧpt, the high-priestess of Ȧmen; their son
Shabaka became the first king of the XXVth dynasty. Among the
monuments of this period may be mentioned: The altar, stand,
and libation bowl, dedicated by Nes-Ȧmsu to Kashta, Shep-en-
Ȧpt, and Ȧmenȧrṭās (Bay 20, No. 794); the base of a statue
inscribed with the names of Shep-en-Ȧpt I, Shep-en-Ȧpt II, etc.
(Bay 20, No. 795); and the alabaster vessel of Kashta and
Ȧmenȧrṭās (Wall-case 139, Fourth Egyptian Room, No. 84).
Twenty-Fifth Dynasty. From Nubia... 700.
B C

Shabaka, or Sabaco, whom some identify with So of 2 Kings xvii,
4, was a contemporary of Sargon and Sennacherib, kings of Assyria.
With one or other of these kings he must have had correspondence,
for two seals bearing the name of Shabaka were found among the
tablets of the Royal Library at Nineveh. (See Nineveh Gallery, Table-
case I, No. 32, etc.) Among the objects bearing his name are several
scarabs, and an alabaster vase in the Fourth Egyptian Room
(Table-case D and Wall-case 139), and a basalt slab (Bay 25, No.
797) inscribed with a copy of a mythological text, copied by the
king’s order from an old, half obliterated document. The portion of
the text surviving contains legends of Rā, Osiris, Set, Horus, Ptaḥ
and other gods; and it seems to imply that all their powers were
absorbed by Ptaḥ, in whose temple the slab was set up. Of
Shabaka’s sister, the great Princess Ȧmenȧrṭās, may be mentioned
the following objects: A fine inscribed statue (Wall-case 107, Third
Egyptian Room), her lapis-lazuli scarab (Table-case D, Fourth
Egyptian Room), and a steatite cylinder inscribed with her names
and titles (Wall-case 193, same room). This princess possessed great
power in Thebes, and she repaired portions of some of the great
temples of that city, and built a small chapel near the temple of
Ȧmen. She re-established the worship of the gods, and devoted a
large proportion of her property to the restoration of their statues
and the observance of their festivals.
Shabaka was succeeded by Shabataka (see a bronze shrine
dedicated by him to Ȧmen-Rā in Wall-case 123 in the Fourth
Egyptian Room), of whom little is known. He was followed by
Taharqa, the Tirhâḳâh of the Bible, (2 Kings xix, 9), the son of a
farmer and the lady Āqleq, who began to reign between.. 693
B C
and 691. He was an ally of Hezekiah, king of Judah. About 676,
Esarhaddon, king of Assyria, crushed the revolt in Palestine, and
six years later he invaded Egypt, defeated Taharqa, captured
Memphis, and appointed twenty governors over the various
provinces of the country. After the death of Esarhaddon, in 668,
Taharqa returned and proclaimed himself king of Egypt at Memphis;
but Ashur-bani-pal, the new king of Assyria, marched against him

and defeated his forces, which were assembled at Karbaniti, a city
probably situated near the north-east frontier of Egypt. Taharqa fled,
and Ashur-bani-pal marched into Egypt, crushed the enemy, and re-
appointed the governors who had been appointed by his father.
Taharqa repaired several temples at Thebes, and built a large
temple to Ȧmen at Napata, and a small one in honour of Usertsen
III at Semnah. For a bronze figure of the king, and two plaques
and scarabs bearing his name, see Table-case K, Wall-case 193,
and Table-case D in the Third and Fourth Egyptian Rooms.
The successor of Taharqa was Tanuath Ȧmen, the Tandamanie
of the cuneiform inscriptions, who had been co-regent with him.
After the death of Taharqa, as the result of a dream Tanuath Ȧmen
invaded Egypt, and captured Heliopolis; he tried to turn the
Assyrians out of Memphis, but failed. Hearing that the king of
Assyria was coming with a large army, he fled to Thebes, whither he
was followed by the Assyrians, who sacked the city. Tanuath-Ȧmen
fled once more, and his subsequent history is unknown. A cast of
the Stele of the Dream is exhibited in Bay 22, No. 799, and an
account of the burning and pillage of Thebes is given on the great
cylinder of Ashur-bani-pal (Table-case H, Babylonian Room), and
the calamities which came upon the city are described by the
prophet Nahum (iii, 10).
Twenty-Sixth Dynasty. From Saïs.
About.. 666.
B C
Psemthek I, or Psammetichus, was the son of Nekau,
governor of Saïs, and married Shep-en-Ȧpt, the daughter of Piānkhi
and Ȧmenȧrṭās I. Thus, by marriage, he obtained a claim to the
throne of Egypt. He appears to have fought against the Assyrians on
every opportunity for many years, and at length by the help of
Carian and Ionian mercenaries he succeeded in expelling them, and
in making himself master of all Egypt. He established garrisons at
Elephantine, Pelusium, Daphnae, and Marea. He protected the

Greeks, a colony of whom he settled in the city of Naukratis. He
encouraged trade of every kind, and embarked in many commercial
enterprises. He rebuilt, or enlarged, the temple of the goddess
Neith of Saïs (see bronze figures of her in Wall-case 125, Fourth
Egyptian Room), and built a gallery in the Serapeum at Ṣaḳḳârah.
Among the monuments of his reign are: An intercolumnar slab
sculptured with a scene representing the king making an offering to
the gods; from the temple of Temu at Rosetta (Bay 24, No. 800). A
shaft of a column, and a portion of a statue, inscribed with his
names and titles (Bay 24, Nos. 801, 802). For smaller objects
inscribed with his name see the Foundation Deposits and the
figure of Isis (Table-cases K and H, Third Egyptian Room), his
ushabti figure (Wall-case 78, Second Egyptian Room), and his
scarabs (Table-case D, Fourth Egyptian Room).
B. C. 612.
Nekau, or Necho, maintained an army of Greeks, and two fleets,
one in the Mediterranean and one in the Red Sea. He recut and
enlarged the old canal which in the time of Seti I joined the Nile and
the Red Sea, and is said to have employed 120,000 men in the work.
He led an army into Syria, and fought with Josiah, king of Judah,
who attempted to bar his progress in the valley of Megiddo; Josiah
was struck by an Egyptian arrow which penetrated his disguise, and
he died (2 Kings xxiii, 29 ff.; 2 Chron. xxxv, 22). Necho advanced
towards the Euphrates, but was met at Karkemish by
Nebuchadnezzar II and his army, and in the battle which followed he
was defeated. Among the small objects inscribed with his name are:
A bronze shrine (Table-case H, Third Egyptian Room), a porcelain
vase (Wall-case 157, Fourth Egyptian Room), an alabastron (Wall-
case 139, Fourth Egyptian Room), and a limestone draughtsman
(Standard-case C, Fourth Egyptian Room).
B. C. 596.
B. C. 592.

Head of a colossal statue of
Psammetichus II, about B. C. 596.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay
23, No. 803.]
The reign of Psammetichus II, the son of Necho, was short and
unimportant; but he appears to have made a raid into Nubia. He
repaired several of the large temples at Heliopolis, Memphis, Karnak,
and Elephantine. Among the monuments of his reign is a head from
a colossal statue of the king, found near the south end of the Suez
Canal (Bay 23, No. 803). For small objects inscribed with his name
see the scarabs in Table-case D, and a portion of a sistrum in
Wall-case 157, Fourth Egyptian Room. Under Ḥāā-ȧb-Rā Uaḥ-ȧb-
Rā, the Pharaoh Ḥophra of Jeremiah xliv, 30 and the Apries of
the Greeks, Egypt enjoyed a period of great prosperity, directly due
to the encouragement he gave to commerce, and to the business
qualities of the Greeks who had settled in Naukratis and elsewhere
in Egypt. He made an expedition into Syria. Zedekiah, king of
Judah, counted upon his help to repulse Nebuchadnezzar II; but
failing to do so, Ḥophra incurred the denunciations of the prophet
Jeremiah: “And this shall be a sign to you, saith the L, that I will
ORD
punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall
surely stand against you for evil: Thus saith the L: Behold, I will
ORD
give Pharaoh-hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and
into the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of
Judah into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon his enemy,
and that sought his life” (Jeremiah xliv, 29-30). Pharaoh Ḥophra was
dethroned by his own soldiers, who made their general Ȧāḥmes
(Amāsis II) king in his stead. Among monuments bearing his name
are a limestone stele, on which is sculptured the figure of the king
(Bay 22, No. 804), and a portion of a statue of Pefā-Net, the king’s
chief physician (Central Saloon, No. 805).
B. C. 572.
Amāsis II treated his former master with kindness, but, as
Ḥophra persisted in raiding the country, further fighting ensued. In

the end, Ḥophra was slain by his own soldiers on board his boat.
During the reign of Amāsis II Nebuchadnezzar II attempted to
invade Egypt, with what success is unknown. During this long reign
of about 44 years the country in general enjoyed peace and
prosperity, and the quarries were re-opened and many temples
restored; remains of his building activity are visible on the sites of all
the great sanctuaries of Egypt. He was a generous patron of the
Greeks, and granted them lands and many privileges. Among the
monuments of his reign are: Two granite tablets for offerings, or
altars (Bay 16, No. 806; Bay 17, No. 807); a stele, dated in his
eighth year, recording the dedication of a building to Neith, goddess
of Saïs (Bay 24, No. 808); a weight inscribed with his prenomen
(Wall-case 180, Fourth Egyptian Room), and handles of two sistra
(Wall-case 187, same room).
Amāsis II married Thent-kheta, by whom he became the father of
Psammetichus III. He was also the official husband of the famous
high-priestess of Ȧmen, Ānkhnes-neferȧb-Rā, the daughter of
Psammetichus II and the Lady Takhauath, and the adopted
[39]
daughter of Nit-Ȧqert (Nitokris), high priestess of Ȧmen. The
magnificent sarcophagus in the Southern Egyptian Gallery was
made for her (Bay 24, No. 811). It is undoubtedly one of the finest
monuments of the XXVIth dynasty in the British Museum. (See
Plates XLIII, XLIV). The reliefs and figures are carefully executed,
and the hieroglyphics are well cut. In the Ptolemaïc Period this
sarcophagus was used for a royal scribe named Ȧmen-ḥetep, or Pi-
Menth, his name being inserted in the cartouches and the feminine
suffixes being changed to masculine. Ānkhnes-neferȧb-Rā built a
chapel at Thebes, from which came slabs Nos. 812, 813 (Bay 24).
Worthy of note also are two fine bronze figures of Harpokrates-
Ȧmen and Menu, which were dedicated to Queen Ānkhnes-
neferȧb-Rā by priests in her temple (see Table-case H, Third
Egyptian Room). Amāsis II had a daughter, Ta-Khart-Ȧst (for a
portion of a statue of her see Bay 24, No. 814).
PLATE XLIII.

Queen Ānkhnes-neferȧb-Rā, daughter of
Psammetichus II and Queen Takhauath, wearing the
head-dress of Isis-Hathor. From the cover of the
sarcophagus of the queen.
About B. C. 600.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 24, No. 811.]
PLATE XLIV.
The Sky-goddess Nut. From the inside of the
sarcophagus of Queen Ānkhnes-neferȧb-Rā.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 24, No. 811.]
PLATE XLV.
Kneeling statue of Uaḥ-ȧb-Rā, a prince,
governor, and commander-in-chief, about B. C.
600.
XXVIth dynasty.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 21, No. 818.]
The last king of this dynasty was Psammetichus III. During his
short reign, which lasted six months only, the Persians under their
king Cambyses invaded Egypt, and, having defeated the Egyptians at
Pelusium, marched on to Memphis and captured it. After a short
time Cambyses put Psammetichus to death, and Egypt became a
province, or satrapy, of Persia.
During the rule of the XXVIth dynasty over Egypt, it appears that
several native Nubian kings ruled the Northern Sûdân from Napata,
the modern Gebel Barkal. Among these were Ȧspelta and Ḥeru-
sa-ȧtef, the former of whom probably reigned about.. 625 and
B C
the latter about.. 580. For casts of stelae recording the
B C
Coronation of Ȧspelta and the Annals of Ḥeru-sa-ȧtef, see Bay
18, No. 815, and Bay 20, No. 816. A cast of a stele inscribed with
an edict against the eaters of raw meat is in Bay 20, No. 817.
Under the XXVIth dynasty a great revival of art and learning
took place, due partly to the settled condition of the country under a
firm government, and partly to the material prosperity which
obtained at that period. The painter and sculptor took for their

models the reliefs and statues of the Early Empire, and the funerary
masons and scribes cut or wrote on the stelae and tombs texts
which were composed under the VIth dynasty, or earlier. The
monuments of the period are more often made of dark limestone,
dark green or grey schist, and basalt than granite, which was so
commonly used for coffins, statues, stelae, etc., under the Middle
Empire. These substances give to the large monuments of the Saïte
Period a sad and sometimes heavy effect. Among the many fine
examples of the sculpture of the period may be mentioned: The
black basalt kneeling statue of Uaḥ-ȧb-Rā, a prince and general of
the army (see Plate XLV; Bay 21, No. 818); the portion of the
kneeling figure of Khnem-ȧb-Rā-Men, prefect of Saïs, holding a
shrine of Neith (Bay 23, No. 819); the portion of a figure of
Ānkh-p-kharṭ, a priest who had ministered in the temple for eighty
years (Bay 24, No. 820); and the libation bowl dedicated to the
goddesses Mut and Hathor (Bay 22, Nos. 821, 822). The casts of
the Cow of Hathor and the Hippopotamus of Smeṭsmeṭ are also
very instructive (Bay 25, No. 823; Bay 26, No. 824). Of the massive
stone sarcophagi and coffins, Nos. 825-829 are very fine
important examples. On the two granite sarcophagi of Nes-Qeṭiu
(No. 825) and Ḥāp-men (No. 826) are cut the figures of all the
gods who were believed to protect the dead; but the others (Nos.
827-29) are plainer. The sepulchral stelae are very numerous;
interesting examples will be found in Bays 21, 22, etc.
Twenty-Seventh Dynasty. From Persia... 527.
B C
The rule of the Persians over Egypt lasted about one hundred and
ten years. Cambyses, having established himself as king, set out on
an expedition to the Sûdân. On his way thither he despatched an
army of 50,000 men to the Oasis of Jupiter Ammon, now known as
Sîwah, to secure the submission of the tribes; but, after reaching
Khârgah, these troops were never more heard of. Cambyses
continued his march into Nubia, where, it seems, he came in touch

with a native army somewhere near the Third Cataract. According to
the annals of Nȧstasen, king of Nubia, his boats were captured on
the river, and all his soldiers slain after a fierce fight. Greek tradition
states that Cambyses committed many sacrilegious acts in Egypt;
but the inscription of Utcha-ḥer-resenet, the chancellor of Saïs,
records that Cambyses cleared out the temple of Neith in that city,
restored its revenues, and reinstated its priests. This done he went
to the temple in person, and performed acts of worship, like the
Pharaohs of old. The money which he gave the chancellor enabled
him “to provide with a coffin the man who was too poor to buy one,
and he took care of the children.”
B. C. 521.
Darius I, Hystaspes, was a wise and enlightened king, and he
tried to understand the religion and customs of the Egyptians. He
established a coinage, encouraged trade, subscribed money for
expenses incurred in the discovery of a new Apis Bull, supported
religious institutions, and commissioned the chancellor Utcha-ḥer-
resenet to found a school for the training of scribes. He was tolerant;
and built a temple to Ȧmen-Rā in the Oasis of Al-Khârgah, on the
walls of which is cut a remarkable hymn to Ȧmen. He also completed
the canal between the Nile and the Red Sea, which Necho began,
and so added greatly to the prosperity of the country. In the latter
part of his reign the Egyptians, led by Khabbesha, revolted against
the Persian rule with some success. Darius determined to set out
from Persia to put down the rebellion, but died before he could do
so. The triumph of Khabbesha was short-lived, for Xerxes the
Great marched against him, defeated his forces, and reduced the
country to servitude worse than before. Xerxes did nothing for the
gods or people of Egypt, and left few traces of his reign in the
country. An alabaster vase inscribed with his name in four
languages, Egyptian, Persian, Median and Babylonian, which was
found at Halicarnassus, is exhibited in the Gold Room in the British
Museum. For fragments of other vases, on which his name appears
in Egyptian letters, within a cartouche, and with the additions

“Pharaoh, the Great,” as here given, see Wall-cases Nos. 28 and 29,
in the Babylonian Room. A cast of a stele, dated in his fourth year,
with a bilingual inscription in Egyptian and Aramean, is exhibited in
the Semitic Room (Second Northern Gallery, Wall-case 29).
𓍹(cid:0)𓆼𓆷𓇌𓄿𓃭𓆷𓄿(cid:0)𓍺𓉐𓉻𓅮𓉻𓂝
B. C. 486.
B. C. 466.
In the reign of Artaxerxes I another revolt, headed by Inarôs, a
Libyan, who was assisted by the Athenians, broke out, and at the
battle of Papremis, the satrap of Egypt, Akhaemenes, was killed
and his forces defeated. Subsequently the Persians defeated the
Egyptians, and Inarôs was captured and taken to Persia, where a
few years later he was impaled and flayed alive.
B. C. 424.
Darius II, Nothus, repaired the temple of Ȧmen-Rā at Al-
Khârgah, and added his name to its walls. In his reign the Egyptians
at length succeeded in throwing off the Persian yoke. Their leader,
Amyrtaios, has been thought to be Ȧmen-ruṭ-meri-Ȧmen.
Twenty-Eighth Dynasty. From Saïs... 420 (?).
B C
According to the King List of Manetho the XXVIIIth dynasty
consisted of one king, who was named Amyrtaios; Julius Africanus
and the Syncellus state that he reigned six years, and make Saïs the
seat of his rule. At one time authorities identified Amyrtaios with the
king Ȧmen-ruṭ, whose name
𓊹𓄤𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓌷(cid:0)𓏏𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓇾𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓌗𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓌻(cid:0)𓍺
is found on a plank
from a coffin preserved at Berlin. The form of the prenomen,
however, proves that Ȧmen-ruṭ lived at a period anterior to
Amyrtaios, and the identification must, therefore, be abandoned.

Twenty-Ninth Dynasty. From Mendes... 399.
B C
Of the five kings of this dynasty only three appear to have left
remains, viz. Naifaauruṭ (Nepherites), Haḳer (Achoris), and
Psamut; their reigns were unimportant, their total length being only
about twenty-one years.
Thirtieth Dynasty. From Sebennytus... 378.
B C

B. C. 378.
Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt, the Nektanebês and Nektanebus I of classical
writers, succeeded in overthrowing the dynasty of Mendes, and
made himself king of all Egypt, which he ruled with success for a
period of eighteen years. He repaired several of the temples of
Memphis and Thebes, and the temple of Darius I at Al-Khârgah, and
revived the custom of setting up obelisks. He also founded the
temple of Horus at Ḥebt, the modern Behbît-al-Ḥagârah. During his
prosperous reign more attention was given to the performance of
ceremonies connected with the dead, and, as a result, a
considerable number of statues, stelae, etc., which may be
attributed to his reign have come down to us.
PLATE XLVI.
Obelisk dedicated to Thoth
by King Ḥeru-nekht-ḥebt, B. C.
378.
XXXth dynasty.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery,
Bay 31, No. 919.]
PLATE XLVII.
Scenes and texts from the Second Section of the Book of What is in the Other
World. From the sarcophagus of King Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt, B. C. 378.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 25, No. 923.]
Among his monuments worthy of special note are: 1. A pair of
obelisks, inscribed with his names and titles, and dedicated to
“Thoth, the Twice Great,” before whose temple they were set up.
They were taken from a town in the Delta during the eighteenth
century, and stood for many years before one of the mosques of
Cairo (see Plate XLVI). (Bays 31, 32, Nos. 919, 920.) 2. Portion of
a statue of Ȧmen-Rā(?), dedicated to the god by this king. (Bay 30,
No. 921.) 3. Sarcophagus of Nectanebus I. (See Plate XLVII.)
This most valuable and interesting object is one of the most
remarkable monuments of this king. The inside is decorated with
figures of the gods, and on the outside are cut the texts and

illustrations of a series of sections of the great funerary work entitled
the Book of what is in the Ṭuat (i. e., the Other World). The Ṭuat
was a long narrow valley which ran parallel with Egypt, and was
neither above nor below this earth; a river flowed through its whole
length. It was entered on the left bank of the Nile near Thebes, ran
due north as far as Saïs, then curved to the east, and finally
terminated where the sun rose. This valley was divided into ten
sections, and at each end was a sort of ante-chamber or vestibule.
Each section was filled with its own peculiar beings, many of whom
were hostile to the dead who wished to pass through it in the Boat
of the Sun-god, which traversed it nightly. The god himself could
only do this by uttering words of power. The Book of what is in the
Ṭuat was supposed to contain these words of power; and copies of it
were written on papyri, or cut on sarcophagi, so that their
possessors or occupants might be able to recite them in case of
need. The representations of the gods which accompanied the texts
enabled the dead to recognize the several beings of the Other World
when they met them, and to recite the appropriate words of power.
On the rounded head of the sarcophagus the First Section of the
Ṭuat is sculptured, and on the foot the Ninth Section; on the right
hand side are the Second and Sixth Sections, and on the left are the
Third and Eighth Sections (Bay 25, No. 923). These Sections refer
to the kingdoms of the dead of Thebes, Abydos, and Saïs; the other
six Sections were probably sculptured on the cover, which was
destroyed in the eighteenth century; those relating to Memphis and
Heliopolis are omitted.
Nectanebus I was succeeded by his son Tcheḥrȧ (Teôs, or
Tachos), in whose reign the Persians led by Artaxerxes II made an
attack upon Egypt, but failed to conquer it.
B. C. 358.
Teôs was succeeded by his son Nekht-neb-f, or Nectanebus II,
in whose reign the Persians, under Artaxerxes III, once again
obtained possession of the country. The reign of Nectanebus II, who
was the last native king of Egypt, was on the whole peaceful and

prosperous; he repaired many temples, and his name is found on
buildings in all the great sanctuaries from Philae to Sebennytus in
the Delta. The statues and stelae of the period are well-cut, and the
work is tasteful and delicate. Among them may be mentioned: A
granite statue of Nectanebus II (Bay 29, No. 924); the two
intercolumnar slabs on which are representations of the king
kneeling and making an offering (Bay 27, No. 926; Bay 28, No.
927); and a small gilded door from the model of a shrine, on
which the king is represented kneeling and making an offering
(Table-case C, Fourth Egyptian Room).
The Persians, having succeeded in obtaining the supreme power
once again, held it for a period of about eight years; but their rule
was hateful to the Egyptians, and when Alexander the Great
(born.. 356, died 324), who had defeated Darius III at the Battle
B C
of Issus, B. C. 332, arrived at Memphis, he was welcomed as the
saviour of the country. He marched to the Oasis of Sîwah (Jupiter
Ammon) and entered the temple of Ȧmen-Rā, and worshipped the
god, who acknowledged him to be his son and therefore the rightful
king of Egypt. Soon after, in.. 331, Alexander founded the city of
B C
Alexandria.
In the scramble for the provinces of Alexander’s great Empire
which took place at his death, Egypt fell to the share of one of his
generals, Ptolemy Lagus, who administered the country in the name
of Alexander’s sons, Philip Arrhidaeus and Alexander II of
Egypt, the former of whom never set foot in the country; the latter
was brought thither as a child of six years, and was murdered when
he was thirteen years old (.. 311); but in spite of these facts
B C
Ptolemy Lagus caused buildings to be erected in their names, and
ruled the country as their loyal servant. To the period.. 332-306
B C
belong the portion of a clepsydra inscribed with the name of
Alexander the Great (Bay 29, No. 948); the portion of a
clepsydra inscribed with the name of Philip Arrhidaeus (Bay 29,
No. 949); and the papyrus of Nes-Ȧmsu, containing the Book of
Overthrowing Āpep, which is dated in the twelfth year of “Pharaoh
Alexander, the son of Alexander,” i. e., Alexander II (No. 10,188). In

the seventh year of his reign Alexander II restored to the temples of
the city of Pe-Ṭep (Buto) the property which had been wrested from
it by Xerxes the Great: a cast of the stele which commemorates this
fact will be found in Bay 28, No. 950.

CHAPTER XIII.
THE PTOLEMAÏC PERIOD.
Under the capable rule of the earlier Ptolemies, Egypt became
prosperous and powerful, and in the reign of Philadelphus she was
the wealthiest country in the world. Though they and their court
were Greeks and spoke Greek, the language of the priesthood and
people was Egyptian, and the native religion of the country remained
practically unchanged. As time went on, however, Greek became
more and more the official language, and Egyptian was only used
officially for religious purposes. The Ptolemies worshipped the
Egyptian gods, offered up sacrifices to them, and rebuilt and
endowed many of their temples, e. g., at Denderah, Edfû, Esna,
Philae, Dakkah, etc. They adopted Egyptian names and titles,
married their sisters and nieces, and in every way they adopted the
habits of Egyptian Pharaohs; many were crowned with all the
ancient rites and ceremonies at Memphis. They did not, however,
permit the priests to interfere in the government of the country,
which was administered on Greek lines, and though at times their
power was skilfully disguised, it was nevertheless ubiquitous and
effective. The revenues which they drew from Egypt were very large,
and no other monarchs in the world at that time possessed such
vast wealth as the Ptolemies. This was due to the encouragement
which they gave to commercial enterprises of every kind, and to the
freedom to trade which was enjoyed by the Jews, who had settled in
large numbers not only in Alexandria, but also in the rich provinces
of the Fayyûm, and in the Thebaïd, and in Syene.
Ptolemy I, Soter I, B. C. 304, founded the Alexandrian
Library and Museum, settled a number of Jews in Alexandria, and
introduced the worship of the god Hades, who was henceforth

known in Egypt as Serapis, i. e., Ȧsȧr-Ḥāpi, or Osiris-Apis. (See Wall-
cases 176-181, Fourth Egyptian Room.) For a relief and an
inscription from his buildings at Terenouthis, see Bay 25, Nos. 951,
952.
PLATE XLVIII.
Relief with figures of Ptolemy II, Philadelphus, and Queen Arsinoë, about B. C. 260.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 25, No. 953.]
Ptolemy II, Philadelphus, B. C. 287 or 286, founded the cities
of Berenice Troglodytica, on the Red Sea, and Arsinoë in the
Fayyûm, and built the famous Pharos, or lighthouse, at Alexandria,
one of the seven wonders of the world. In his reign the priest
Manetho wrote a History of Egypt, of which only the King List is
extant, and the famous Greek version of the Old Testament, known
as the Septuagint, was compiled. He added largely to the
Alexandrian Library, which is said at that time to have contained
400,000 works. For stelae, sculptured with reliefs in which Ptolemy
II and Queen Arsinoë are represented making offerings to the
gods, see Bay 25, Nos. 953-955 (see Plate XLVIII); a portion of a
royal edict is in Bay 28, No. 956.
Stele sculptured with a scene representing Ptolemy II, Philadelphus, making
offerings to Ȧmsu, or Menu, Uatchet, etc., about B. C. 260.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 25, No. 954.]
Ptolemy III, Euergetes I, B. C. 246, conquered the greater
portion of Western Asia. He was a patron of the arts and learning,
and he repaired and rebuilt many of the ancient temples. To
commemorate his victories and the benefits which he conferred on
Egypt, the priesthood assembled at Canopus in the ninth year of his
reign, and passed a Decree conferring special honours on the king
and his queen Berenice. It was ordered that the Decree be cut in
the Greek and Egyptian languages on stelae to be set up in the most
prominent places in temples of the first, second, and third class
throughout Egypt, in order that all men might read of the king’s
bounty. The Egyptian version was inscribed in two kinds of writing,
viz., in hieroglyphics and in demotic. The Decree also ordered that

one day be added to the calendar every fourth year, thus
anticipating the leap-year of modern times. For a cast of the
Decree of Canopus see Bay 28, No. 957. Ptolemy III began to
build the temple of Edfû (see Plate XLIX),.. 237, which was
B C
finished by Ptolemy XI,.. 57. Objects inscribed with his name are
B C
not common. (For a gold ring which was made in his reign see
Table-case J, Fourth Egyptian Room.)
Ptolemy IV, Philopator I, B. C. 222 or 221, added a hall to the
temple which the Nubian king, Ergamenes, built at Dakkah, and
dedicated a temple to Homer. He defeated Antiochus the Great at
the Battle of Raphia, but did nothing further to break his power. He
organized elephant hunts in the Sûdân, and transported the
animals by sea to Egypt for military purposes; a Greek inscription set
up by Alexandros, general of the elephant hunts of Ptolemy IV, is in
Bay 26, No. 958.
PLATE XLIX.
View of the Temple of Edfû, taken from the top of the pylon. The temple was
begun B. C. 237 and finished B. C. 57, and its construction occupied 180 years, 3
months, and 14 days.
PLATE L.
Granite monolithic shrine dedicated to the goddess Isis of
Philae by Ptolemy IX (?), Euergetes II, B. C. 147-117.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 30, No. 962.]
Ptolemy V, Epiphanes, B. C. 205, was a great benefactor of the
temples of Egypt; and to mark their gratitude to him the priests of
all Egypt met in solemn assembly at Memphis in the ninth year of his
reign, and passed a Decree ordering that increased honours be paid
to the king and his ancestors, that a statue of him be set up in each
of the temples, and that a copy of the Decree, inscribed upon a
stone stele, in hieroglyphic, demotic and Greek writing, be likewise
set up in each temple of the first, second, and third class throughout
Egypt. This Decree was duly carried out, for portions of three or four
stelae, inscribed with the text of it, have been discovered. Most
important of all is the stele which was found by M. Boussard in 1798,

which, because it was dug up near Rosetta, is commonly known as
the Rosetta Stone (see No. 960, Southern Egyptian Gallery). A
special interest attaches to this monument, for from it Thomas
Young, in 1816-1818, deduced the values of several letters of the
Egyptian alphabet, and succeeded in reading the name of Ptolemy.
Next with the help of this text and of an obelisk from Philae, the
Frenchman Champollion read the name Cleopatra, and formulated
a correct system of Egyptian decipherment. (For details see page 41
ff.) During the reign of Ptolemy V, the Egyptians invoked the
protection of Rome.
Head of a statue of one of the Ptolemies, about B. C.
300.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 27, No. 947.]
Ptolemy VI, Eupator, died the year he became king. During the
reign of Ptolemy VII, Philometor (.. 173), the Jews were
B C
permitted to build a temple at Onion, Onias being high-priest. (For a
stele on which are sculptured figures of Ptolemy VII and the two
Queens Cleopatra, see Bay 27, No. 961.) Ptolemy VIII was
murdered. Ptolemy IX, Euergetes II, B. C. 147-117, finished the
temple of Edfû, and repaired many temples both in Egypt and Nubia.
From one of these came the fine monolithic granite shrine (see
Plate L) in which a sacred bird or animal was kept (Bay 30, No.
962). It was found lying on its side among the ruins of a Coptic
church on the Island of Philae; it had been utilized by the builders of
the church as the base of a Christian altar. Ptolemy X, B. C. 117,
conferred great benefits on the temples of the First Cataract (see
Bay 29, No. 963); Ptolemy XI and Ptolemy XII were killed in..
B C
87 and 81 respectively; Ptolemy XIII, B. C. 80-51, began to build
the temples of Denderah and Esna; Ptolemy XIV, B. C. 51, and
his sister Cleopatra were left by their father, Ptolemy XIII, under
the guardianship of the Roman Senate, and Pompey was made
their guardian. After the battle of Pharsalia, Pompey fled to Egypt,
and was murdered at the instance of Ptolemy XIV, who had banished
his wife Cleopatra. In.. 48, Julius Caesar landed in Egypt, defeated
B C

Ptolemy, who was drowned, and reinstated Cleopatra. Ptolemy XV
was appointed co-regent; but he was murdered by Cleopatra’s
orders in.. 45, and Ptolemy XVI, Caesarion, son of Julius
B C
Caesar and Cleopatra, was named co-regent in his stead. After the
defeat of Antony by Octavianus and the death of Antony and
Cleopatra, Egypt became a Roman Province, B. C. 30.
The Egyptian antiquities of the Ptolemaïc Period in the British
Museum consist chiefly of Stelae inscribed with funerary texts; they
are comparatively small in size, and are painted in bright colours.
The reliefs, in which the figures of the gods are represented, are
delicately cut, and the hieroglyphics have the slender form which is
one of the chief characteristics of the inscriptions of the period. The
texts often contain the ages of the deceased persons, and details
concerning the length of time occupied in the process of
mummification, which are wholly wanting in the funerary
monuments of an earlier period. Among the gods mentioned on the
stelae is Serapis, who represents a fusion of the old Egyptian gods,
Osiris and Apis. (For figures of this god in terra-cotta see Table-case
M in the Fourth Egyptian Room.) The stone coffins of the period
are in the form of a mummy, and are usually carefully cut and
finished. We have already seen that two important edicts of the
priests of Memphis and Canopus were cut on stelae in two forms of
Egyptian writing, viz., hieroglyphic and demotic, and in Greek; there
are also several examples of funerary monuments in the British
Museum in which the hieroglyphic text is followed by a rendering in
demotic and Greek. In the case of small objects, e. g., mummy
labels, the inscriptions are in demotic and Greek only.
Limestone window with mullions in the form of pillars with Hathor-headed capitals.
From the temple at Denderah.
Ptolemaïc Period.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 25, No. 972.]
Among the noteworthy monuments of this period are: A statue of
the goddess Isis, holding before her a figure of Osiris, whom she
protects with her wings, dedicated to the goddess by one

Shashanq (Bay 28, No. 964); massive green granite beetle,
symbol of Kheperȧ, the self-produced god, the creator of the
universe, and the type of resurrection (Central Saloon, No. 965);
stone serpent, with the bust of a woman (Bay 32, No. 966); green
basalt coffin of the lady Ānkhet (Bay 29, No. 967) and the
limestone coffin of Ḥes-Peṭān-Ȧst (Bay 26, No. 968); limestone
window from the clerestory of the temple of Denderah (Bay 25, No.
972); and a marble sun-dial from Alexandria (Bay 29, No. 976).
An interesting group of stelae, with demotic inscriptions, is exhibited
in Bay 27 (Nos. 983-990); and in Bay 29 (No. 994) is the stele of
Euonymos, with an inscription in Greek and demotic. Among the
stelae which give the ages of deceased persons may be noted those
of Ḥer-ȧbu, a priest of king Saḥu-Rā (?), who lived fifty years,
seven months, and five days (Bay 30, No. 995); Tashermut, a
priestess who died aged ninety-seven years (Bay 27, No. 996); and
Berenice (?) who died aged sixty-four years, eight months, and
twenty-six days (Bay 29, No. 998).
Of all the stelae of this period the most interesting is that of the
lady That-I-em-ḥetep, who belonged to a family that reckoned
among its members several princes of Memphis and high priests of
Ptaḥ (Bay 29, No. 1027). She was born in the ninth year of the
reign of Ptolemy XIII, about.. 71, and when fourteen years old
B C
she was married to her half-brother, the priest P-shere-en-Ptaḥ
(see his stele in Bay 27, No. 1026). During the first twelve years of
her married life she gave birth to three daughters, but no son, which
caused her husband great grief. She and her husband prayed to the
god I-em-ḥetep, the son of Ptaḥ, for a son, and the god, appearing
to P-shere-en-Ptaḥ in a dream, promised to grant his prayer if he
carried out certain works in connexion with the temple. When the
priest awoke he caused the works to be taken in hand, and soon
after they were completed his wife gave birth to a son who was
named I-em-ḥetep, and surnamed Peṭā-Bast (see his stele in Bay 27,
No. 1030). Four years afterwards That-I-em-ḥetep died, and was
buried with due ceremony by her husband, whom she addresses
thus: “O my brother, my husband, my friend, the Ur-kherp-ḥem (i. e.,

high priest of Memphis), cease not to drink, to eat, to be drunken,
and to marry wives, and to enjoy thyself, and to follow the desire of
thy heart by day and by night; and let not sorrow or sadness find a
place in thy heart during all the years which thou shalt live upon
earth. Ȧmenti (i. e., the land of the dead) is the land of stupor and
darkness, and a place of oppression for those who are therein. The
august ones sleep in their mummied forms; they cannot awake to
see their brethren, they cannot look upon their fathers and mothers,
and they are unmindful of wives and children. The living water which
the earth hath for its dwellers is stagnant water for me.... I no
longer know where I am, now that I have arrived in this valley [of
the dead]. Would that I had water to drink from a running stream,
and one to say to me, ‘Remove not thy pitcher from the stream’! O
that my face were turned towards the north wind on the river bank
that the coolness thereof might quiet the anguish which is in my
heart!
“He whose name is Universal Death calleth everyone to him; and
they come unto him with quaking hearts, and they are terrified
through their fear of him. With him is no distinction made between
gods and men, and the great are even as the little in his sight. He
showeth no favour to those who long for him; for he carrieth away
the babe from his mother, as well as the aged man. As he goeth
about on his way, all men fear him, and, though all make
supplication before him, he turneth not his face towards them.
Entreaty reacheth not unto him, for he will not hearken unto him
that maketh supplication, and him who presenteth unto him
offerings and funerary, he will not regard.”
The ideas expressed in the above extract have their origin in the
materialism which found its way into Egypt under the rule of the
Ptolemies.
THE ROMAN PERIOD.
The building at Philae commonly known as “Pharaoh’s Bed.”

Roman Period.
Egypt, having become a province of the Roman Empire on the
death of Cleopatra,.. 30, was forthwith placed under the rule of a
B C
Prefect, and administered like any other Roman Province. Under the
strict but just rule of her new masters Egypt prospered, for trade
flourished, and life and property were, on the whole, well protected
by the laws of Rome. Reference has already been made (see page
255) to the Nubian kingdom founded by Piānkhi, who made Napata
his capital; it must also be noted that at the same period, between.. 500 and the end of the Ptolemaïc rule, a second Nubian kingdom
B C
was founded by some unknown Sûdânî chief on the Island of Meroë,
with a capital at Meroë, on the Nile, about 50 miles south of its
junction with the Atbara. When the Romans began to rule over
Egypt the Meroïtic Kingdom was in a flourishing state, and the
authority of its sovereign, who appears to have been Queen
[40]
Ȧmenṭārit (having also the title Candace, which was common
to all the Queens of Meroë), probably extended northwards as far as
the First Cataract. In.. 29 Candace made a treaty with Cornelius
B C
Gallus, the first prefect of Egypt; but, five years later, when Ælius
Gallus was prefect, she invaded Egyptian territory and slew the
Roman garrisons of Philae and Syene. In revenge the Romans
invaded Nubia and marched to Napata, which they sacked and
burned; and Candace was forced to submit. From that time onward
little is heard of the Kingdom of Meroë; but the pyramids which still
stand near Meroë prove that the Nubians observed the old Egyptian
customs in connexion with the burial of their dead in chambers
under the ground. They offered sacrifices to Osiris, Isis, Nephthys,
Anubis, and other gods of the cycle of Osiris, and recited the ancient
formulas, which are also written in hieroglyphics on the walls of the
funerary chapels; and in some instances they reproduced on the
walls whole scenes, e. g., the Weighing of the Heart, and the Pylons
of the Other World, from Ptolemaïc copies of the Book of the Dead,
as for example, on the sandstone relief from a pyramid chapel
at Meroë which is exhibited in Bay 31, No. 1049. On the right
Queen Candace is seated, her consort by her side, holding symbols

of sovereignty, her feet resting on representatives of conquered
tribes. Immediately in front of the large figure of the queen we see
her pouring out libations to Osiris, and round about her are vases of
wine, beer, unguents, bulls for sacrifice, etc., for the funerary feast.
In her company are priests, officials, relatives, and others, who bear
offerings, palm branches, etc. This relief was originally coloured red.
Also may be mentioned the two altars with Meroïtic Inscriptions
exhibited in Bay 30, Nos. 1050, 1051. The Meroïtic character has
not yet been deciphered.
PLATE LI.
Tablet recording the restoration of the temple of Mut by the Emperor Tiberius
Caesar, about A. D. 20.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 27, No. 1052.]
PLATE LII.
Tablet recording the setting up of a statue to the goddess Mut, and the
restoration of certain buildings by the Emperor Tiberius Caesar, about A. D. 20.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 29, No. 1053.]
Nearly all the Roman emperors from Tiberius (.. 14) to Decius
A D
(.. 249) adopted Egyptian names and titles, and caused their
A D
names to be written within cartouches like those of the Pharaohs.
The stele in Bay 27 (No. 1052) states that Tiberius rebuilt portions
of the temple of Mut at Thebes (see Plate LI); and another stele
(Bay 29, No. 1053) refers to the setting up by him of a statue of the
goddess Mut, and the re-endowment of the portion of the temple
wherein it stood (see Plate LII). In the reign of Nero (.. 54-69)
A D
two centurions sent into the Sûdân to report on the general
condition of the country reached the marshes near Shâmbî, about
700 miles south of Kharṭûm. Tradition asserts that Christianity was
preached in Alexandria towards the close of his reign, and that St.
Mark arrived in that city,.. 69. To this period belongs stele No.
A D
1057 (Bay 32), which was set up to mark the gratitude of the
Egyptians to Nero for appointing F. Claudius Balbillus, prefect of
Egypt. Hadrian visited Egypt twice, and founded the city of
Antinoopolis in memory of his friend Antinous who was drowned in

the Nile; when at Thebes he went with the Empress Sabina to view
the Colossi (see Plate XXXIII). Marcus Aurelius (.. 161-180)
A D
was a just ruler and favoured Christianity in Egypt; in his reign the
walls which surrounded the Sphinx at Gîzah were repaired (see stele,
No. 1058, Bay 32). Septimius Severus (.. 196) issued an edict
A D
against the Christians in Egypt, and his successor, Caracalla (..
A D
211), encouraged the pagan Egyptians and favoured their religion.
Decius (.. 249) made a systematic attempt to destroy the
A D
Christians, and every person was called upon to offer sacrifice to the
gods, or suffer death. In the reign of Diocletian (.. 284), the
A D
Blemmyes, a confederation of tribes who lived in the Eastern
Sûdân, became so powerful that they compelled the Roman
[41]
garrisons to withdraw from the Dodekaschoinos, and the
emperor was obliged to hire the Nobadae, or tribes of the Western
Desert, to keep them in check. He also agreed to pay the Blemmyes
a fixed annual sum to refrain from raiding Roman territory in Egypt,
and built a temple at Elephantine wherein representatives of all the
peoples concerned might swear to observe the covenant in the
presence of their respective gods. Diocletian in fact abandoned the
Sûdân. In 304 he issued a savage edict against the Christians in
Egypt, and the persecution which followed it was marked with
ferocious cruelty. Many thousands of Egyptians fled to the desert
monasteries to avoid conscription, and embraced Christianity. From
one of his buildings on the Island of Philae comes the stone bearing
the names of Diocletian and Constantine (.. 324) (No. 1059,
A D
Bay 26).
In 378 Theodosius the Great proclaimed Christianity the religion
of his Empire, and many temples in Lower Egypt were turned at
once into churches; but the ancient Egyptian gods were worshipped
as usual in Upper Egypt. Marcianus (.. 450-457) invaded Nubia
A D
and punished the Blemmyes and Nobadae for raiding Roman
territory; they paid a huge fine, gave hostages for their future good
behaviour, and made an agreement to keep the peace for one
hundred years. In return they stipulated that they should be allowed
to make pilgrimages annually to Philae, and to borrow the statue of

Isis from time to time, so that they might take it about the country,
and give the people the opportunity of invoking the protection and
blessing of the goddess. In the first half of the sixth century the
Nubians embraced Christianity, and Silko, king of the Nobadae,
founded a kingdom having its capital at Dongola. During the reign of
Justinian (.. 527-565) the hundred years’ truce came to an end,
A D
and the Blemmyes and Nobadae again began to give trouble.
Justinian, believing that the cause of the revolt was the annual
pilgrimage to Philae, sent his officer Narses thither, with strict orders
to close the temples of Isis. Narses threw the priests of Isis into
prison, confiscated the revenues of the goddess, and carried off the
statues of the gods of Philae to Constantinople.
In the reign of Heraclius the Persians, under Chosroës, invaded
Egypt (.. 619), which they held for ten years. Owing to the
A D
desertion from the Persians of the Arab tribes, who had now
attached themselves to the victorious troops of Muḥammad the
Prophet (born at Mekkah, Aug. 20,.. 570, died in June, 632),
A D
Heraclius was able to attack the Persians, in Syria, and defeating
them became master of Egypt once more. In 640 ʿAmr Ibn al-Âṣî,
the general of the Khalîfa Omar, conquered Egypt, and thus the
country became a province of the newly-founded Arab Empire.
During the rule of the Romans, which lasted from.. 30 to..
B C A D
640, the Greek language entirely superseded Egyptian for official
purposes, and it was also usually employed in the funerary
inscriptions. Interesting examples are the stele of Politta, inscribed
with a metrical text (Bay 26, No. 1083), and the stele of
Artemidorus (Bay 26, No. 1084). On the pillar altar (Bay 31, No.
1086) is a dedication in Greek to the god Serapis of the city of
Canopus; and on the square sandstone slab (Bay 26, No. 1087) is a
very interesting but difficult text recording the cleansing and
restoration of some public building near the town of Kom Ombo in
Upper Egypt, whilst Gabriel was Duke of the Thebaïd. Other
interesting inscriptions in Greek are found in ostraka, or potsherds,
many of which are dated in the reigns of Claudius, Nero, Vespasian,
Trajan, Antoninus, Sabinus, Pertinax, etc., will be found exhibited in

Table-case C in the Third Egyptian Room. During the early centuries
of Roman rule the Egyptians continued to mummify their dead, and
to bury them with the ancient rites and ceremonies. The use of the
funerary stele or tablet continued down to the fourth century..;
A D
but the gods represented on them appeared in different forms, and
Greek or demotic took the place of hieroglyphics. In the region
about Thebes and to the south of that city the cult of Osiris and Isis
continued until about.. 560, and a simple system of
A D
mummification was practised in connexion with the worship of the
dead.
Sepulchral tablet sculptured with figures of doves,
pillars, leaf patterns, etc.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 30, No. 1156.]
The most important event during the rule of the Romans was the
introduction of Christianity by St. Mark the Apostle, who,
according to tradition, preached the Gospel in Alexandria about..
A D
69. The knowledge of the new religion spread rapidly, and converts
multiplied and, though no direct proof is forthcoming at present,
there is reason to think that before the middle of the second century
an account of the life of Christ and His words and works existed in
the Egyptian tongue. Men who had embraced Christianity retired into
the desert to lead a life of austerity and contemplation, among
whom may be mentioned Frontonius, who collected seventy
disciples, and withdrew to the Nitrian Desert between.. 138 and
A D
161, and Paul the Anchorite, who died about.. 250, aged 113
A D
years. The life and teaching of Anthony, born 250, died 355,
induced thousands to become monks. Pachomius, in 320,
systematized monasticism, but he required the recluses to work for
their living whilst they cultivated spiritual excellences. Women as
well as men flocked to the desert, and nunneries existed in many
places in Egypt. The number of such recluses was great; at Nitria
alone there were 5,000 monks, and, in addition, 600 lived solitary
lives in the neighbouring desert. At Oxyrhynchus there were 10,000
monks, and the bishop had charge of 20,000 nuns. In the

monasteries of Nitria and Panopolis, and elsewhere, the Holy
Scriptures were translated from Greek into Egyptian (i. e., Coptic,
see pages 35-39) and Syriac, and other Oriental languages; and
copies of them were carried by monks and fugitive Christians into
Nubia, and even into remote Abyssinia, by way of the Blue Nile. In
the Oases of the Western Desert were numbers of Christians in the
fourth and fifth centuries; wherever the monk went he took
Christianity with him. Still, in spite of the spread of the new religion,
the beliefs which the Egyptians had received from their pagan
ancestors also flourished in Egypt for centuries after the preaching
of St. Mark, and people of all classes clung to their amulets, and
words of power, and magical ceremonies, even after they had
embraced Christianity. For a very long time the Cross was regarded
as an amulet possessing the greatest magical power possible, and
the Name of Christ was held to be the greatest of all words of
power.
Sepulchral tablet of Plêïnôs, a Sepulchral tablet of David, an
“reader.” Egyptian Christian.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 32, [Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 30,
No. 1145.] No. 1160.]
The principal doctrine of the Egyptian Christians, or Copts, is that
God the Father and Christ are of one and the Same nature; Arius
held that God and Christ are only similar in nature, and was
declared a heretic. The Copts are called Monophysites, because
they believed, and still believe, that Christ is of one nature only, and
Jacobites because their views as to the nature of Christ are
identical with those of one Jacob, a famous preacher of the
Monophysite doctrine. The head of the Coptic Church is the
Patriarch, who is chosen from among the monks of the Monastery
of St. Anthony in the Red Sea Desert. The Copts attach great
importance to Baptism, they face the East when praying, and they
pray seven times a day. They make use of Confession, and keep five
Fasts and seven Festivals. The Copts were persecuted severely in the
reigns of Hadrian, Decius, Diocletian, and Julian the Apostate (..
A D

361), but the cruellest of the persecutions of the Roman emperors
was that of Diocletian in 304. The Copts commemorated the
sufferings of their community on this occasion by making the Era of
the Martyrs, by which they date their documents, begin with the
day of Diocletian’s accession to the throne, i. e., August 29th, A. D.
284. In the reign of Justinian the Copts split up into two great
parties, i. e., the Melkites, or Royalists, which included all those who
were in the service of the Government, and the Jacobites, or
ordinary inhabitants of the country; henceforward each party chose
its own Patriarch. The dissensions between them materially aided
the Conquest of Egypt by the Arabs.
Side by side with Christianity there also sprang up in Egypt, under
Roman rule, a number of sects to which the title “Gnostic” has been
given. They derived many of their views and beliefs from the religion
of the ancient Egyptians, and they admitted into their system many
of the old gods, e. g., Khnemu, Ptaḥ, Rā, Ȧmen, Thoth, Osiris, etc.
The founders of Gnosticism, a word derived from the Greek gnosis,
“knowledge,” claimed to possess a superiority of knowledge in
respect of things divine and celestial, and they regarded the
knowledge of God as the truest perfection of knowledge. The
characteristic god of the Gnostics was Abrasax, or Abraxas, and
he represented the O who embraced A within himself. They
NE LL
attributed magical properties to stones, which, when cut into certain
forms, and inscribed with legends, or mystic names, words, and
letters, afforded, they thought, protection against moral and physical
evil. An unusually fine collection of Gnostic Gems and Amulets is
exhibited in Table-case N, in the Fourth Egyptian Room: No. 1
speaks of the “Father of the World, the God in Three Forms”; No. 18
shows us the lion-headed serpent Knoumis and the mystic symbol
[symbol not in Unicode]; No. 25 makes the Osiris-Christ to be Jah of
the Hebrews, and also Alpha and Omega; Nos. 36, 37, and 44 have
figures of Abraxas cut upon them; No. 87 mentions Solomon’s
Seal, No. 110, the six Archangels; and of peculiar interest are No.
231, engraved with a representation of the Crucifixion, and No
469, engraved with a representation of the Birth of Christ.

THE ARAB PERIOD... 640-1517.
A D
As the Arabs were materially assisted in their conquest of Egypt by
the Copts, the new masters of the country treated the latter with
great consideration for about 100 years; but, from.. 750 onwards,
A D
they persecuted their Christian subjects at intervals with great
severity. The non-Christian inhabitants of the country embraced
Islâm, or the doctrine of Muḥammad the Prophet, and, with the
religion of the Muslims, the knowledge of the Arabic language
spread throughout Egypt. It gradually superseded Egyptian, or
Coptic, and about the end of the twelfth century it became the
common language of the country, Coptic ceasing to be spoken
except in monasteries and remote villages. In 642 the Arabs, under
ʿAbd-Allah bin Sa’ad, occupied the Egyptian Sûdân, and ten years
later they marched to Dongola, destroyed the church and the town,
and levied an annual tribute, or Baḳṭ, consisting of 360 or 365 men
upon the Nubians, which was paid with more or less regularity for
nearly 500 years. On several occasions the Arabs invited the
Christians of Nubia to embrace Islâm, but the latter steadily rejected
the offer, paid their tribute, and continued to worship God according
to the teachings of their Jacobite priests, who were appointed to
their office by the Patriarch of Alexandria. Many hundreds of
churches were built in the Sûdân between.. 540, when the
A D
Christian religion was established by Silko, king of the Nobadae, and
1450, when the Christian kingdom of Alwa, on the Blue Nile, was
destroyed. During the greater part of these 900 years the Liturgy
was recited in Greek, and the services were conducted after the
manner laid down by the spiritual authorities in Alexandria. Certain
Books of the Bible and various Offices were translated into Nûbî, the
language of the country; but of these few remains are extant.
PLATE LIII.
Sepulchral tablet set up in memory of Apa Paḥomo, the head of a monastic
settlement. On the right is a figure of Saint Victor, and on the left a figure of Saint
Apakene.

VIIth to Xth century, A. D.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 30, No. 1103.]
In Egypt the Copts founded and maintained many monasteries,
and built many churches; and from these come two remarkable
series of monuments, inscribed in Greek and Coptic, which are
exhibited in Bays 28, 30, and 32 of the Southern Egyptian Gallery.
The greater number of them belong to the period between 600 and
1000.., and among them may be noted:—The stele of Isos(?),
A D
inscribed in Greek with a prayer to the “God of Spirits” (Bay 26, No.
1094); the stele of Paḥomo (see Plate LIII), the father of a
monastic settlement, with figures of the military saints Apakene
and Victor (Bay 30, No. 1103); the apse from the shrine of a saint,
on which are sculptured vine branches, with doves seated on them,
and figures of flowers, shells, fish, etc.: a very interesting object
(Bay 32, No. 1104); the stele of John the Deacon, inscribed with
a lament on the bitterness of death (Bay 30, No. 1105); an altar
slab from a church (Bay 32, No. 1106); three stelae, inscribed with
invocations to saints (Bays 30, 32, Nos. 1107-1109); apse from
a shrine of a saint from a church at Philae (Bay 30, No. 1113); and
a group of stelae commemorating the holy women Hêlenê,
daughter of Peter, deacon and steward of the Church of St. John, in
Esna, in Upper Egypt (Bay 30, No. 1115), Sara, Rachel,
Teucharis, Troïs, and Rebecca (Bay 32, Nos. 1116-1120). Many
of the sepulchral stelae are richly sculptured with pediments of
shrines, pillars with elaborate carvings, figures of doves, and
everywhere are prominent the cross, which is assumed to be
identical with the ānkh 𓋹, the old Egyptian symbol of “life,” and the
crown. On several of them also are seen Alpha and Omega, Α Ω.
The most elaborately decorated stele is that which was set up for
the child Mary in the old church at Ṣûhâḳ. The design is good, the
cutting excellent, and it is one of the finest examples extant of this
[42]
class of monument (Bay 32, No. 1123). A very interesting group
of Coptic documents, consisting of affidavits, letters, invoices,
contracts, extracts from the Scriptures and from liturgies, hymns,
etc., is exhibited in Table-case M in the Fourth Egyptian Room. In

division 4 of the same case is a good collection of Coptic crosses,
pendants with figures of St. George, etc., from Panopolis. Several
very fine examples of linenwork from Coptic graves and churches
will be found in Table-cases E and J in the Third Egyptian Room, and
a handsome bier cloth in Wall-cases 70 and 71, in the Second
Egyptian Room.
Sepulchral tablet of Abraam, the Sepulchral tablet of Rachel, a
“perfect monk.” Christian lady.
[Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 30, [Southern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 32,
No. 1136.] No. 1117.]
Soon after the Arabs had conquered Egypt, they found it
necessary to keep a strong garrison at Syene, the modern Aswân. In
order to relieve the soldiers of the garrison from the duty of a
pilgrimage to Mekkah, an order was issued from Fosṭâṭ, the first
Arab capital in Egypt, near Old Cairo, that a pilgrimage to Aswân
counted as a pilgrimage to Mekkah; hence for some two or three
hundred years Aswân was regarded as a holy place, and pious
Muslims were brought there from all parts to be buried. A collection
of gravestones inscribed in Kûfî, or Kufic, a form of Arabic
writing, from the old Muḥammadan cemetery at Aswân, is exhibited
in the Second Northern Gallery (Wall-cases 52-54). The oldest
example is that of Azhar, son of ʿAbd as-Salâm, who died in the year
of the Hejira 252 =.. 866.
A D
The Arab dynasties which ruled Egypt and the Sûdân between 656
and 1517 are as follows:—
[43].. 661-750.
ʿOmayyad Khalîfas A D
ʿAbbâsid Khalîfas ” 750-868.
Tûlûnid Khalîfas ” 868-913.
Fâṭimid Khalîfas ” 913-1193.
Ayyûbid Khalîfas ” 1193-1249.
Baḥrite Mamlûks ” 1249-1382.
[44] ” 1382-1517.
Circassian Mamlûks

The Arab domination came to an end in 1517, when Selim, sultân
of Turkey, conquered the country, and Egypt became a Turkish
Province, or Pashalik.

A LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL KINGS
OF EGYPT.
PREDYNASTIC PERIOD.
Kings of Lower Egypt.
1..... u.
2 Seka.
3 Khaȧu.
4 Tȧu.
5 Thesh.
6 Neheb.
7 Uatch-nār, or Uatch-ȧnt.
8 Mekha.
9..... a [10 ff. wanting].
DYNASTIC PERIOD.
First Dynasty... 4400.
B C
Menȧ (Menes).
Tetȧ.
Ȧteth.
Ȧta.
Semti (Ṭen).

Merpeba (Āt-ȧb).
Ḥu (Smerkha).
Sen (or, Qebḥ).
Second Dynasty... 4133.
B C
Neterbaiu, or Betchau, or Besh.
Ḥetep-Sekhemui.
Kakauu.
Baenneter.
Uatchnes.
Perȧbsen.
Senṭ.
Neferka-Rā.
Neferka-Seker.
Ḥetchefa.
Third Dynasty... 3966.
B C
Sanekht.
Bebi (Tchatchai).
Nebka-Rā.
Tcheser.
Tetȧ (Ḥen-nekht).
Setches.
Neferka-Rā Ḥuni.
Fourth Dynasty.

.. 3733.
B C
Seneferu.
Shaȧru.
Khufu (Cheops).
Ṭeṭf-Rā.
Khāf-Rā (Chephren).
Menkau-Rā (Mykerinos).
Shepseskaf.
Sebekka-Rā.
I-em-ḥetep.
Fifth Dynasty... 3566.
B C
Userkaf.
Saḥu-Rā.
Neferȧrika-Rā.
Shepseska-Rā.
Khānefer-Rā.
Useren-Rā Ȧn.
Menkau-Ḥeru.
Ṭeṭka-Rā Ȧssȧ.
Unȧs.
Sixth Dynasty... 3330.
B C
Tetȧ.
Userka-Rā Ȧti.

Pepi I.
Meren-Rā I.
Pepi II.
Meren-Rā II.
Eleventh Dynasty... 2600.
B C
Ȧntef, the Erpā.
Ȧntef Uaḥ ānkh.
Ȧntef Nekht-neb-ṭep-nefer.
Menthu-ḥetep I.
Menthu-ḥetep II.
Menthu-ḥetep III.
Menthu-ḥetep IV.
Menthu-ḥetep V.
Menthu-ḥetep VI.
Menthu-ḥetep VII.
Twelfth Dynasty... 2466.
B C
Ȧmenemḥāt I.
Usertsen I.
Ȧmenemḥāt II.
Usertsen II.
Usertsen III.
Ȧmenemḥāt III.
Ḥer.

Ȧmenemḥāt IV.
Usertsen IV.
Sebek-neferu-Rā.
Eighteenth Dynasty.
Ȧāḥmes I ⎫.. 1600.
B C
Ȧmen-ḥetep I ⎭
Thothmes I ⎫
Thothmes II ⎪.. 1550.
B C
Ḥātshepset ⎪
Thothmes III ⎭
Ȧmen-ḥetep II,.. 1500.
B C
Thothmes IV ⎫.. 1450.
B C
Ȧmen-ḥetep III ⎭
Ȧmen-ḥetep IV (or Khu-en-Ȧten) ⎫
Tutānkh-Ȧmen ⎪.. 1400.
B C
Ȧi ⎪
Ḥeruemḥeb ⎭
Nineteenth Dynasty.
Rameses I ⎫.. 1350.
B C
Seti I ⎭
Rameses II,.. 1330.
B C
Meren-Ptaḥ.
Ȧmenmeses,.. 1250.
B C
Sa-Ptaḥ.
Seti II.
Ȧrsu, the Syrian.

Twentieth Dynasty.
Set-nekht.
Rameses III,.. 1200.
B C
Rameses IV.
Rameses V.
Rameses VI.
Rameses VII.
Rameses VIII.
Rameses IX.
Rameses X,.. 1133.
B C
Rameses XI.
Rameses XII.
Twenty-first Dynasty... 1100.
B C
At Tanis.
Nes-Ba-neb-Ṭeṭṭeṭ.
Pasebkhānut I.
Ȧmen-em-Ȧpt.
Sa-Ȧmen.
Pasebkhānut II.
At Thebes.
Ḥer-Ḥeru.
Paiānkh.
Pai-Netchem I.
Men-kheper-Rā.
Pai-Netchem II.

Twenty-second Dynasty... 966.
B C
[Buiu-uaua, the founder.]
Shashanq I (Shishak).
Uasarken I.
Thekeleth I.
Uasarken II.
Shashanq II.
Thekeleth II.
Uasarken III.
Thekeleth III.
Shashanq III.
Pamȧi.
Shashanq IV.
Twenty-third Dynasty... 750.
B C
Peṭā-Bast.
Uasarken IV.
Tafnekht I.
Twenty-fourth Dynasty... 733.
B C
Bocchoris.
Tafnekht II.

Twenty-fifth Dynasty... 700.
B C
Kashta.
Piānkhi.
Shabaka (Sabaco).
Shabataka.
Taharqa (Tirhâḳâh).
Tanuath-Ȧmen.
Twenty-sixth Dynasty... 666.
B C
Psemthek I (Psammetichus).
Nekau (Necho).
Psemthek II.
Uaḥȧb-Rā (Ḥophra).
Ȧāḥmes II (Amāsis).
Psemthek III.
Twenty-seventh Dynasty... 527.
B C
Cambyses.
Darius I (Hystaspes.)
Xerxes I.
Artaxerxes.
Darius II.

Twenty-eighth Dynasty.
Amyrtaios.
Twenty-ninth Dynasty... 399.
B C
Naifaauruṭ.
Haḳer.
Psamut.
Thirtieth Dynasty... 378.
B C
Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt (Nektanebês).
Tcheḥrȧ (Teôs).
Nekht-nebf (Nektanebos).
Thirty-first Dynasty.
Darius III,.. 336.
B C
Macedonians... 340.
B C
Alexander the Great.
Philip Arrhidaeus.
Alexander II.
Ptolemies.

.. 305-30.
B C
Ptolemy I.
Ptolemy II.
Ptolemy III.
Ptolemy IV.
Ptolemy V.
Ptolemy VI.
Ptolemy VII.
Ptolemy VIII.
Ptolemy IX.
Ptolemy X.
Ptolemy XI.
Ptolemy XII.
Ptolemy XIII. ⎫
Cleopatra. ⎭
Ptolemy XIV.
Ptolemy XV.
Ptolemy XVI.

CARTOUCHES OF THE PRINCIPAL
KINGS OF EGYPT.
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
M.
ENȦ
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓈉(cid:0)𓈉𓏏(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓍺
S -.
EM TI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓌻(cid:0)𓂋𓊸(cid:0)𓏤𓊪(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
M--. (M--.)
ER BA PEN ER P BA
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓀘(cid:0)𓍺
S, or
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓀜(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ (or N )?
EMSU U EKHT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓈎𓃀𓎛(cid:0)𓍺
or
𓍹(cid:0)𓈎𓃀𓎛𓅱𓏁(cid:0)𓍺
Q.
EBḤ
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓊹𓅢(cid:0)𓍺
N -, i. e.,
𓍹(cid:0)𓃀𓈚(cid:0)𓍺
B, or
ETER BAIU ESH
𓍹(cid:0)𓃀𓍑𓅱(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
B.
ETCHAU
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓂓𓂺(cid:0)𓂺(cid:0)𓂺(cid:0)𓍺
K -.
A KAU
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓊸𓃝𓊹𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
B--.
A EN NETER
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓉐(cid:0)𓂋𓄣𓋴𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
P--.
ER ȦB SEN
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓋴𓈖(cid:0)𓂧𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
S.
ENṬȦ
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
T.
CHESER
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏏𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
T (Ḥ -.) or
ETȦ EN NEKHT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
T.
CHESERTETȦ
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄤𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EFER KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓎛𓀜𓈖(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓂡(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ.
UNI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓋴𓄤𓆑(cid:0)𓂋𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
S.
ENEFERU

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓐍𓅱𓆑𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
K. (C.)
HUFU HEOPS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓊽𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
Ṭ--R.
EṬ F Ā
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓈍𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
K--R. (C.)
HĀ F Ā HEPHREN
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏠𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
M--R. (M.)
EN KAU Ā YCERINUS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓀼𓊃(cid:0)𓊃𓂓(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
S--.
HEPSES KA F
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆋𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
S--R.
EBEK KA Ā
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇍𓅓𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓍺
I- -.
EM ḤETEP
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓋴𓂓(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
U--.
SR KA F
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓃅𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
S--R.
AḤ U Ā
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓀼𓋴𓋴𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
S--R.
HEPSES KA Ā
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓈖𓄊𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓍺
U--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
SR EN Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓆛(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ.
N
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓅃𓏠𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
M--Ḥ.
EN KAU ERU
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓊽𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
Ṭ--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EṬ KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓊃(cid:0)𓊃𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ.
SSȦ
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓃹(cid:0)𓈖𓇋𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
U.
NȦS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏏𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
T, or
𓍹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏏𓇋𓌻(cid:0)𓈖𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛(cid:0)𓍺
T -
ETȦ ETȦ
- -P. (Tetȧ beloved of Ptaḥ.)
MER EN TAḤ
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓌻𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
M -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ERI Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓊪𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
P (I.).
EPI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓌻𓂋(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ER EN Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓅇𓅓𓎂(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
T-- -.
CHEFAU EM SA F

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄤𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EFER KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓊪𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
P (II.).
EPI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓌻(cid:0)𓈖𓅇𓅓𓎂(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -T-- -.
Ā MER EN CHEFAU EM SA F
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄣𓌻𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
R--,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
Ā MERI ȦB
𓍹(cid:0)𓄡(cid:0)𓏏𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
K.
HATI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓂓𓌻𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
R--.
Ā KA MERI
𓂋(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓂝
E
𓄂(cid:0)𓂝
Ḥ
𓏎𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓇋
Ȧ -Ȧ. The E
RPĀ Ā NTEF RPĀ
and Ḥ, Ȧ -Ȧ.
Ā NTEF
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)[𓇳]𓎟𓐑(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EB ḤAPT Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍿(cid:0)𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓍺
M -.
ENTH ḤETEP
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎟𓇾(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EB TAUI Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍿(cid:0)𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓍺
M -.
ENTH ḤETEP
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎟𓊤(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EB ḤAP Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍿(cid:0)𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓍺
M -.
ENTH ḤETEP
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓌻𓋹(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ER ĀNKH Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍿𓅱𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓍺
M -.
ENTHU ḤETEP
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋴𓋹𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
S-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
E ĀNKH KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍿𓅱𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓍺
M -.
ENTHU ḤETEP
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏣𓉔(cid:0)𓂋𓁷(cid:0)𓏤𓐙(cid:0)𓏛(cid:0)𓍺
R----,
Ā SESHESH HER ḤER MAĀT
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓏎𓉼𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-(I.).
NTEF ĀA
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳 𓍹(cid:0)𓏎𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓉻(cid:0)𓍺
son of the Sun, Ȧ -
NTEF ĀA
(II.).
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏣𓄋(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏲𓀁𓌷(cid:0)𓏛𓆄(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
Ā SESHESH ȦPU MAĀT
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓏎𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓉻(cid:0)𓏛(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-(III.).
NTEF ĀA

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓅭(cid:0)𓇳𓏎𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓉼(cid:0)𓍺
son of the Sun, Ȧ -
NTEF ĀA
(IV.).
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋞𓆣(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
UB KHEPER Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓏎𓈖(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ.
NTEF
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋴𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
S--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
EḤETEP ȦB Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓅓𓄂(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-- (I.).
MEN EM ḤĀT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆣𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
K--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
HEPER KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓊃(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U (I.). (S.)
SERTSEN ESONCHOSIS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋞𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
UB KAU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓅓𓄂(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-- (II.).
MEN EM ḤĀT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓈍𓆣(cid:0)𓍺
K--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
HEPER KHĀ Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓊃(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U (II.).
SERTSEN
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓈍𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
K--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
HĀ KAU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓋴𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓊃(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U (III.).
SERTSEN
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓈖𓌷(cid:0)𓂝𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
AĀT EN Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓅓𓄂(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-- (III.).
MEN EM ḤĀT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓌷(cid:0)𓂝𓊤𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
AĀ KHERU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓅓𓄂(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-- (IV.).
MEN EM ḤĀT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄫𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
R--,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
Ā ȦU ȦB
𓍹(cid:0)𓁷(cid:0)𓂋𓈐(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ.
ER
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆋𓄤𓄤𓄤(cid:0)𓍺
S--R.
EBEK NEFERU Ā
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓐍(cid:0)𓂤𓇾(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓍺
K--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
HU TAUI Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓅃𓎼𓄑(cid:0)𓄑(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ-(?)- (?).
ERU NEST TAUI
𓎟𓇾(cid:0)𓇾𓍹(cid:0)𓄣(cid:0)𓏤𓇋(cid:0)𓂝𓈗(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ -.
Ā ȦB

𓊹𓄤 Neter nefer Beautiful God,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓉻(cid:0)𓂝𓄣(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓍺
Ā-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of
A ȦB TAUI Ā
the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓀁𓊪(cid:0)𓊪𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ.
PEPȦ
𓊹𓄤 Neter nefer 𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓉻(cid:0)𓂝𓈎(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺 Ā--R,
A QENEN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓀁𓊪(cid:0)𓊪𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ.
PEPȦ
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓃩𓉻(cid:0)𓄇(cid:0)𓄇(cid:0)𓍺
Ā-- -S,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
A PEḤ TI ET
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓋟𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓃩(cid:0)𓍺
N (?).
UBTI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋴(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
S-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
E USER EN Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓐍𓇌𓄿𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
K.
HIAN
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓋴𓇳(cid:0)𓈎𓈖(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓂡(cid:0)𓍺
S -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
EQENEN Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
T -.
AU ĀA
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓋴𓇳(cid:0)𓈎𓈖(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓂡(cid:0)𓍺
S -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
EQENEN Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
T--.
AU ĀA ĀA
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓈎𓈖(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
S -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
EQENEN Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
T--.
AU ĀA QEN
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓇅𓆣(cid:0)𓍺
U--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ATCH KHEPER Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓏤𓀭𓄠𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
K.
AMES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓊃𓏄𓎟(cid:0)𓍺
R--,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
Ā SEKHENT NEB
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓊃𓈖(cid:0)𓆱(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏏𓂡(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R--.
Ā SEKHENT EN
𓆥𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓇾𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎟(cid:0)𓄇(cid:0)𓄇(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son
EB PEḤTI Ā
of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇺𓄠𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ. (A I.)
ĀḤMES MĀSIS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
T--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
CHESER KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓊵(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ -. (A I.)
MEN ḤETEP MENOPHIS

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓉻𓆣𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
Ā-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
A KHEPER KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓅝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓄠𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
T -. (T I.)
EḤUTI MES HOTHMES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓉻𓆣𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
Ā-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
A KHEPER EN Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓅝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓄠(cid:0)𓊃𓄤𓈍(cid:0)𓏥(cid:0)𓍺
N--T -.
EFER KHĀU EḤUTI MES
(T II.)
HOTHMES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁦𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
AĀT KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓎸𓄂(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏏𓀼𓏪(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ-- -Ȧ. (Q
ĀT SHEPSET KHNEM MEN UEEN
H.)
ATSHEPSU
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏠𓆣(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EN KHEPER Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓅝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓄠𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
T -. (T III.)
EḤUTI MES HOTHMES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓉻𓆣𓏪(cid:0)𓍺
Ā--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
A KHEPERU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓊵𓊹𓋾𓉺(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-Ȧ. (A II.)
MEN ḤETEP NETER ḤEQ NNU MENOPHIS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏠𓆣𓏪(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EN KHEPERU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓅝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓄠𓋴𓈍(cid:0)𓈍(cid:0)𓏦(cid:0)𓍺
T-- -. (T
EḤUTI MES KHĀ KHĀU HOTHMES
IV.)
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁧𓎟(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EB MAĀT Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓊵𓋾𓋆(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-U. (A III.)
MEN ḤETEP ḤEQ AST MENOPHIS
𓇓𓈞(cid:0)𓏏
S
𓍹(cid:0)𓍘𓇌𓏭𓁗(cid:0)𓍺
T. (A M W
UTEN ḤEMT HI ESOPOTAMIAN IFE OF
A III.)
MENOPHIS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓄤𓆣𓏪𓇳(cid:0)𓌡(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
N--R U--R,
EFER KHEPERU Ā Ā EN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓊵𓊹𓋾𓋆(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ -
MEN ḤETEP NETER
U. (A IV.)
ḤEQ AST MENOPHIS
or
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏏(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓇳𓅜(cid:0)𓐍𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
K--Ȧ.
HU EN TEN
𓇓𓈞(cid:0)𓏏
S Royal wife,
𓅨(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂋
great lady.
UTEN ḤEMT URT
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏏(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓇳𓄤 𓄤𓄤𓄤 𓄤𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓇍𓍘𓁗(cid:0)𓍺 N-N -.
EFER NEFERU ȦTEN EFERTI ITH

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋹𓆣𓏪(cid:0)𓍺
Ā--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
NKH KHEPERU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓉻𓂓𓃒𓂡(cid:0)𓆣𓏪(cid:0)𓍺
S----R.
ĀA KA NEKHT KHEPERU Ā
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆣𓏪𓎟(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EB KHEPERU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓏏(cid:0)𓏏𓅱𓋹𓋾𓉺𓇓(cid:0)𓍺
T--Ȧ Ȧ R.
UT ĀNKH MEN ḤEQ NNU ESU
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆣𓆣𓏪𓁧𓁹(cid:0)𓍺
K----R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of
HEPER KHEPERU MAĀT ȦRI Ā
the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓏐𓊹𓇋𓀁𓇌𓊹𓋾𓋆(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-Ȧ U.
TF NETER I NETER ḤEQ AST
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)(cid:0)𓆣𓏪𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
T--R-- -
CHESER KHEPERU Ā SETEP EN
R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓌹𓅃𓋔𓐝(cid:0)𓎱(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ -
Ā MEN
- Ḥ--.
MERI EN ERU EM ḤEB
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏠𓄇(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
EN PEḤTET Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄠𓋴𓇓𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
R -. (R I.)
Ā MESSU AMESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁧𓏠(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EN MAĀT Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓌹(cid:0)𓇌𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
P-- -S. (S I.)
TAḤ MERI EN ETI ETI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓁧𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U--R--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
SR MAĀT Ā SETEP EN Ā
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓁩𓈘𓄠𓋴𓇓(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -Ȧ. (R
Ā MESSU MERI MEN AMESES
II.)
or
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓆄𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓍉(cid:0)𓏌𓇳(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓍺
U--R--R,
SR MAĀT Ā SETEP EN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈘𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓄠𓋴𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ -
MEN MER
R -.
Ā MESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓁩𓈘(cid:0)𓈖𓃝(cid:0)𓍺
B -R-- -Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of
A Ā MERI EN MEN
the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓁧𓈘(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓊵𓁷(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓍺
P---- -
TAḤ MERI EN ḤETEP ḤER. (M.)
MAĀT ENEPHTHAH
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓆣𓏪𓇳𓈘𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U--R--Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
SR KHEPERU Ā MERI MEN
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓇌𓈘(cid:0)𓈖𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛(cid:0)𓍺
S-- -P.
ETI MERI EN TAḤ
(S II.)
ETI

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓏇𓇋𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
M--R--R,
EN MȦ Ā SETEP EN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓁩𓄠𓋴𓋴𓋾𓈎𓋆(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-- -U.
MEN MESES ḤEQ AST
(Ȧ -.)
MEN MESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓐍𓅜𓏜𓇳(cid:0)𓈖𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
K--R--R,
HU EN Ā SETEP EN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓌹𓈖(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
P-- -
TAḤ MERI EN
S -P. (M II.)
A TAḤ ENEPHTHAH
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓄊𓈍(cid:0)𓏦𓇳𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
U--R
SR KHĀU Ā
- -R--Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
SETEP EN Ā MERI MEN
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓁩𓈘(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂡𓈘(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓍺
R-Ȧ-S -
Ā MERI MEN MERER ET.
NEKHT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓁧𓈘𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U--R--Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son
SR MAĀT Ā MERI MEN
of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓁛𓄠𓊃(cid:0)𓊃𓋾𓈎𓉺(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -Ȧ. (R
Ā MESES ḤEQ NNU AMESES
III.)
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓁧𓁩𓋔𓍉(cid:0)𓍺
U--R--Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of
SR MAĀT Ā SETEP EN MEN
the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓁩𓈘𓄠𓋾𓆄𓊃(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -Ȧ -R
Ā MESES MERI MEN Ā ḤEQ. (R IV.)
MAĀT AMESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓄊𓁧𓋴𓆣(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U--R-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
SR MAĀT Ā S KHEPER EN Ā
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁩𓁩𓈘𓇓𓄠𓋴𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
R-- Ȧ -Ȧ
Ā MES MERI MEN MEN
-. (R V.)
SUTEN F AMESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁩𓁧𓈘(cid:0)𓎟(cid:0)𓍺
R -Ȧ-- -,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of
Ā MEN MAĀT MERI NEB
the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁩𓄠𓊃(cid:0)𓊃𓊹𓋾𓉺(cid:0)𓍺
R -Ȧ-Ȧ.
Ā MEN MESES NETER ḤEQ NNU
(R VI.)
AMESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓁧(cid:0)𓈘𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -Ȧ-- -
Ā USR MAĀ MEN MERI SETEP
-R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁩𓄠𓊃(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓏏𓇋𓊹𓋾𓉺(cid:0)𓍺
R -
EN Ā Ā
Ȧ----Ȧ. (R VII.)
MEN MESES TȦ NETER ḤEQ NNU AMESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁧𓄊𓁩𓅜(cid:0)𓐍𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R---- -Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son
Ā MAĀT USR KHU EN MEN
of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁩(cid:0)𓈘𓄠𓋴𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
R -Ȧ-- -Ȧ.
Ā MEN MESES MERI MEN

(R VIII.)
AMESES
𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓈅(cid:0)𓏤
Neb ta Lord of the Land,
𓍹(cid:0)𓋴𓈍(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓇳𓈘𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
S---R -Ȧ,
KHĀ EN Ā MERI MEN
𓎟(cid:0)𓈍(cid:0)𓏦
neb khāu lord of crowns,
𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓄠𓊃(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓏤𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -P. (R IX.)
Ā MESES SA TAḤ AMESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄤𓂓(cid:0)𓏦𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
N--R--R,
EFER KAU Ā SETEP EN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓈍𓁛𓋆𓁩𓄠𓋴𓋴𓌻(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓍺
R--
Ā MESES
-Ȧ--U. (R X.)
MERER MEN KHĀ AST AMESES
𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓈅(cid:0)𓏤𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆣𓁧𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -
Ā KHEPER MAĀT SETEP
-R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓁛𓁩𓇓𓄠𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
R-(?)
EN Ā Ā MES SUTEN
Ȧ. (R XI.)
MEN AMESES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏠𓁧𓀮𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
M--R--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
EN MAĀT Ā SETEP EN Ā
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓈍𓁛𓋆(cid:0)𓈘(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓂋𓄠𓊹𓋾𓉺𓊃(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓍺
R -
Ā
- -Ȧ K U Ȧ. (R XII.)
MESES MERER MEN HĀ AST NETER ḤEQ NNU AMESES
𓊹𓄤𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓇾𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋑𓆣𓇳𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R----
Ā ḤETCH KHEPER SETEP
-R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EN Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓌻𓄓(cid:0)𓊃𓃝𓎟𓊽𓊽𓏏(cid:0)𓊖(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ--N-- -
MEN MER ES BA NEB
T. (S.)
EṬṬEṬET MENDES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓉻𓆣(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R----M,
Ā ĀA KHEPER SETEP EN ENTU
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓌹𓅮𓇼(cid:0)𓈍(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓊖(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-P-- -. (P I.)
MEN MERI A SEB KHĀ NU ASEBKHĀNU
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓊹𓍛𓁶(cid:0)𓊪𓇋𓈖(cid:0)𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
N----Ȧ,
ETER ḤEN ṬEP EN MEN
Prophet first of Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
MEN
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓏤𓇯𓅃(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ -Ḥ--Ȧ. (Ḥ -Ḥ.)
ER ERU SA MEN ER ERU
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋑𓆣(cid:0)𓇳𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
K--R--R
HEPER ḤETCH Ā SETEP EN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈘𓆷𓆷𓈖𓈎(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ -
MEN

-S. (S I.)
MERI HASHANQ HISHAK
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓌂𓆣𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
S--R--R
EKHEM KHEPER Ā SETEP EN Ā
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓈘𓍯𓐠𓇋𓂋(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-U. (O I.)
MEN MERI ASARKEN SORKON
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓆄𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R--M -Ȧ--,
Ā USR AĀT MEN SETEP EN
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓈘𓊨𓆇(cid:0)𓏤𓍘𓂋(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓍿(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-- -A. T.
MEN MERI SA ST HEKELETH
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓁧𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R----Ȧ,
Ā USR MAĀT SETEP EN MEN
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓈘𓆇(cid:0)𓏤𓎯𓍯𓐠𓂋(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ--B
MEN MERI SA AST
U. (O II.)
ASARKEN SORKON
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏣𓆣𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
S--R--
ESHESH KHEPER Ā SETEP EN
Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓇳𓈘𓆷𓆷(cid:0)𓍺
MEN
Ȧ -R-S [ ]. (S II.)
MEN Ā MERI HASH ANQ HISHAK
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋑𓁩𓍉(cid:0)𓈖𓊹𓋾𓋆(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ -R-- -Ȧ,
ETCH Ā SETEP EN MEN NETER ḤEQ
U,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
AST
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓈘𓊨𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓍘𓎡(cid:0)𓂋𓍘𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-Ȧ -
MEN MERI SET MERI
T. (T II.)
HEKELETH AKELETH
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆄𓄊𓇳(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U--R--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
SR MAĀT Ā SETEP EN Ā
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓌻𓆷𓆷𓈖(cid:0)𓈎𓋾𓊹𓉺(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ--
MEN MERI
S Ȧ. (S III.)
HASHANQ ḤEQ NETER NNU HISHAK
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓆄𓍉(cid:0)𓈖𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
U--R--Ȧ,
SR MAĀT Ā SETEP EN MEN
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓌻𓅮𓏇𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ-P -
MEN MERI A. (P -.)
MȦI A MȦI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓉻𓆣(cid:0)𓍺
Ā--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
A KHEPER Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓆷𓆷𓈖(cid:0)𓈎(cid:0)𓍺
S. (S IV.)
HASHANQ HISHAK

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓊃𓉔(cid:0)𓂋𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
S-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
E HER ȦB Ā
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓎯𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓊪(cid:0)𓂞𓆇(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓍺
P--.
EṬĀ SA BAST
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
Ā--R--
A KHEPER Ā SETEP EN
Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
MEN
𓍹(cid:0)(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈘𓍯𓐠𓂋(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓈖𓇋(cid:0)𓍺
R -Ȧ -
Ā MEN MERI
U. (O IV.)
ASARKENȦ SORKON
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎝𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
U--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
AḤ KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓅡𓎡(cid:0)𓈖𓂋(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
B.
AKENRENF
𓇓𓏏(cid:0)𓈖
S King
𓍹(cid:0)𓂓𓈚(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓍺
K. Kashta.
UTEN ASHTA
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓈘𓊪𓋹𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ--,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of
MEN MERI P ĀNKHI
the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪𓋹𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
P-.
ĀNKHI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓏠𓆣(cid:0)𓍺
M--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EN KHEPER Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪𓋹𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
P-.
ĀNKHI
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄤𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EFER KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓆷𓃝𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
S. (S.)
HABAKA ABACO
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓊽𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
Ṭ--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EṬ KAU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓆷𓃝𓇾(cid:0)𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
S.
HABATAKA
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄤𓏏(cid:0)𓍃𓐍𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
Ā NEFER TEM KHU
Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓉔𓃭(cid:0)𓈎(cid:0)𓍺
T, or
𓍹(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓉔𓄿𓃭𓈎𓄿(cid:0)𓍺
AHRQ
T. (T.)
AHARQA IRHÂḲÂH
𓆥𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓇾𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓃝𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
R--,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the
Ā BA KA
Sun,
𓎟(cid:0)𓈍(cid:0)𓏦
lord of Crowns,
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓇾(cid:0)𓈖𓍯𓍘(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ--.
MEN TA NUATH
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎝𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
U--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
AḤ ȦB Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪𓋴𓅓𓍿(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓍺
P. (P I.)
SEMTHEK SAMMETICHUS

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄙𓅓𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
U--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ḤEM ȦB Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓂓𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
N. (N II.)
EKAU ECHO
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄤𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
N--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
EFER ȦB Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪𓋴𓅓𓍿(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓍺
P. (P II.)
SEMTHEK SAMMETICHUS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎛𓂝(cid:0)𓂝𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
Ḥ--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ĀĀ ȦB Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎝𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
U--R. (A.)
AḤ ȦB Ā PRIES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓎸𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
K--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
HNEM ȦB Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓇺(cid:0)𓄠𓋋 𓅭(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ--N. (A II.)
ĀḤMES SA ET MĀSIS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋹𓂓(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
Ā-- -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
NKH KA EN Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪𓋴𓅓𓍿(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓍺
P. (P III.)
SEMTHEK SAMMETICHUS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄠𓋴𓅱𓍘(cid:0)𓍺
M -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ESUTH Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓎡𓅓𓃀𓇋𓍿(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓍺
K. (C.)
EMBȦTHET AMBYSES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓋴𓏏(cid:0)𓏏𓅱(cid:0)𓍺
S -R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
ETTU Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓏎𓇾(cid:0)𓃭𓇌𓅱𓆷(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ. (D H.)
NTARIUSHA ARIUS YSTASPES
𓆥𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓇾
Lord of two lands,
𓍹(cid:0)𓐍𓆷𓇌𓄿𓃭(cid:0)𓏤𓆷(cid:0)𓍺
K.
𓅮𓉻(cid:0)𓂝
(X G.)
HSHAIARSHA ERXES THE REAT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓋴𓇒𓈖(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓍺
S--P -T -,
ENEN EN TAḤ ANEN SETEP
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓆼𓃀𓃀𓆷(cid:0)𓍺
(K.)
HABBESHA
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓄿𓃭(cid:0)𓇾𓐍𓆷𓆷𓋴(cid:0)𓍺[45]
A. (A.)
RTAKHSHASHAS RTAXERXES
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓁚𓁩𓈘(cid:0)𓇌(cid:0)𓍺
R--Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
Ā MERI MEN
𓍹(cid:0)𓏎𓍘𓃭(cid:0)𓇌𓌗𓆷(cid:0)𓍺
Ȧ. (D N.)
NTHERIRUṬSHA ARIUS OTHUS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓃝𓈖(cid:0)𓊹(cid:0)𓊹(cid:0)𓊹𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
B--R -,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
A EN Ā NETERU MERI
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏭𓄿𓆑(cid:0)𓉻(cid:0)𓏲(cid:0)𓏦𓌗(cid:0)𓍺
N.
AIFAAURUṬ

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓎸𓁧𓇳(cid:0)𓍺
K--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
HNEM MAĀT Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓉔𓄿𓎼𓃭(cid:0)𓍺
H.
AḲER
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓋴𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R----P,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son
Ā USR SETEP EN TAḤ
of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪𓀔𓏏𓅐(cid:0)𓍺
P.
SAMUT
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓁛𓁩𓋴𓇛𓄣(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
S---R--Ȧ,
NETCHEM ȦB Ā SETEP EN MEN
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓁩𓌻(cid:0)𓂡𓅃𓎳𓏏(cid:0)𓊖(cid:0)𓍺
N -
EKHT
Ḥ-- -Ȧ. (N.)
ERU ḤEBT MERI MEN EKTANEBÊS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓁹(cid:0)𓌷𓏏(cid:0)𓂝(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R-- -M,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of
Ā ȦRI EN AĀT
the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓏎𓇯𓀭𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓁷(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
T-- -
CHE ḤRȦ SETEP
-Ȧ -.
EN N ḤER
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓆣𓂓(cid:0)𓍺
K--R,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
HEPER KA Ā
𓍹(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓆱(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏏𓂡(cid:0)𓃭𓆑(cid:0)𓍺
N--. (N.)
EKHT NEB F EKTANEBOS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓁬𓁛𓈖(cid:0)𓍉(cid:0)𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
S--R--Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son
ETEP EN Ā MERI MEN
of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓄿𓃭(cid:0)𓎡𓊃(cid:0)𓇋(cid:0)𓈖𓂧(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓍺
A. (A G.)
LEKSȦNṬRES LEXANDER THE REAT
𓎟(cid:0)𓇿(cid:0)𓇿
Neb taui
𓍹(cid:0)𓁞𓁩𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
S--R -
ETEP EN Ā
-Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓉔𓇌𓅱𓃭𓇌𓅱𓊪𓍯𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
MERI MEN
P. (P A.)
HIULIUPUAS HILIP RRHIDAEUS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓀠𓄣𓍉(cid:0)𓈖𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓍺
R---- -Ȧ,
Ā QA ȦB SETEP EN MEN
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓄿𓃭(cid:0)𓎡𓊃(cid:0)𓇋(cid:0)𓈖𓂧(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓊃(cid:0)𓍺
A.
LEKSȦNṬRES
(A II.)
LEXANDER
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓁞𓁩𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
S--R--Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son
ETEP EN Ā MERI MEN
of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓂧𓅱𓃭(cid:0)𓐝𓇌𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
P. (P I.
ṬULMIS TOLEMY
S I.)
OTER

𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓇳𓄊𓂓(cid:0)𓏤𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
R----Ȧ,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
son
Ā USR KA MERI MEN
of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓃭(cid:0)𓏲𓐝(cid:0)𓇌𓋴(cid:0)𓍺
P. (P II.
ṬULMIS TOLEMY
P.)
HILADELPHUS
𓆥𓍹(cid:0)𓊹𓇶𓊹𓄯(cid:0)𓈖𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓍉(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓁹𓐙 𓁞𓁩𓌂𓋹(cid:0)𓍺
N -
ETERUI
---P-- -Ȧ--M -R--,
𓅭(cid:0)𓇳
PERUI ĀĀ EN TAḤ SETEP EN MEN ȦRI AĀT Ā SEKHEM ĀNKH
son of the Sun,
𓍹(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓍯𓃭(cid:0)𓐝𓇌𓋴𓋹𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
P P. P (IX.
TUALMIS ĀNKH TCHETTA TAḤ MERI TOLEMY
E II.), living for ever, beloved of P.
UERGETES TAḤ
𓎟(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓇾
Nebt taui Lady of two lands,
𓍹(cid:0)𓈎(cid:0)𓃭𓄿𓊪(cid:0)𓂧(cid:0)𓂋𓄿𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓂧(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏲(cid:0)
𓏌𓋴𓂧(cid:0)𓂋𓄿𓊪(cid:0)𓏌𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓍺
Q-Ṭ.
LAPEṬRAT TCHEṬTU NES RAPENET
C, called T.
LEOPATRA RYPHAENA
𓇴𓆇 Rā sa son of the Sun, 𓃭𓈍(cid:0)𓏦 neb khāu lord of
diadems,
𓍹(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓇌(cid:0)𓋴𓃭(cid:0)𓊃𓋹𓆓(cid:0)(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)
𓊪(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓊨𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓈘(cid:0)𓍺
K P Ȧ C,
ISERES ĀNKH TCHETTA TAḤ SET MERI AESAR
living for ever, of P and I beloved.
TAḤ SIS

FOOTNOTES
[1] The Peninsula of Sinai has been a province of Egypt for
about 6,000 years.
[2] To these must now be added the Barrage at Esna.
[3] Names printed in heavy type are Egyptian; those in capitals
are Greek, and those in italics are the names by which the places
are known by the modern Arabs.
[4]
𓄔(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓈖𓀀(cid:0)𓂝(cid:0)𓎡𓄤𓆑(cid:0)𓂋𓄔𓅓𓈖(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓍿
𓀀𓁐𓏪𓌞𓋴𓂻𓉔(cid:0)𓂋𓅱𓇳(cid:0)𓏤𓄤𓆑(cid:0)𓂋𓋴(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓂜𓎖(cid:0)𓂝𓀁.
[5]
𓂜(cid:0)𓅨(cid:0)𓂧𓀉𓄣(cid:0)𓎡𓄱𓋴𓇋𓅱𓈗𓀁𓏶(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)
(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)(cid:0)𓐝(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓂞(cid:0)𓎖𓆇𓅱𓄧(cid:0)𓏏𓀁𓐝(cid:0)𓄣(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)
𓎡𓇋𓐍(cid:0)𓏭(cid:0)𓊃𓆳𓏏(cid:0)𓏦𓇋𓍿(cid:0)𓏤𓁷(cid:0)𓁶(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇.
[6] For the hieratic text see Papyrus Ebers, Plate 56.
[7] Ibid., Plate 87.
[8] These words mean: “If thou wouldst be a perfect man
make thou [thy] son well pleasing to God.”
[9] These words mean: “I have given bread to the famishing,
water to the thirsty, clothes to the naked, and a boat to him that
was shipwrecked.”
[10] A recent view makes “papyrus” to be derived from the
conjectural name pa-p-ior “that which is of the river.”
[11] A form of the old Egyptian name UN-NEFER
𓃹(cid:0)𓈖𓄤𓆑(cid:0)𓂋𓀀.
[12] Photographs of this Papyrus have been published by the
Trustees of the British Museum, £2 2s. per set.

[13] A full coloured facsimile has been published by the
Trustees of the British Museum, in 37 plates, portfolio, £1 11s.
6d., half bound £1 16s. The Egyptian Text is also issued with an
English translation, etc., 4to., £1 10s.
[14] Also published by the Trustees of the British Museum;
“Facsimiles of the Papyri of Hunefer, Ȧnhai, Kerasher and
Netchemet, with supplementary text from the Papyrus of Nu,” fol.,
£2 10s.
[15] See Note 3 on page 59.
𓅓𓂝𓇌𓀁𓂋(cid:0)𓏲𓂧𓌗𓂋(cid:0)𓈖𓀁𓀀
[16].
[17] The word stele, from the Greek στήλη, means literally an
upright stone, or pillar, or column, which was set up over a grave,
like our tombstone, or in a public place as a memorial of some
public event.
[18] The Muḥammadan speaks of his wife as his “house,” and
the determinative to the Egyptian word shows that the ancient
Egyptian held the same idea about his wife as the modern Arab.
[19] See the flint hippopotami, crocodile, cow’s head, fish, etc.,
in Table-case M (Third Egyptian Room).
[20] The word “fetish” is derived from the Portuguese feitiço, “a
charm.”
[21] From the Precepts of Ptaḥ-ḥetep and the Maxims of
Khensu-ḥetep.
[22] The text of this extract reads:
𓅖𓍿(cid:0)𓈖(cid:0)𓏥𓊃(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓊗𓇋𓊪(cid:0)𓈖𓉔𓄿𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓂋𓊪(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)
𓇯𓉔𓄿𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓂋𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓉔𓄿𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓂋𓈗𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)
𓆑𓍋𓃀𓏏(cid:0)𓎙𓀀𓁐𓏥(cid:0)𓆑𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓇋𓏏(cid:0)𓆑(cid:0)𓆑𓀭
𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓂞(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆑𓁐𓆑𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓄠𓅱
𓀀𓁐𓏥(cid:0)𓆑𓌣𓈖(cid:0)𓏌𓀀𓁐𓏥(cid:0)𓆑𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓌻(cid:0)𓂋
(cid:0)𓏏𓀀𓁐𓏥(cid:0)𓆑𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓄙𓅓𓋴(cid:0)𓀀𓏥(cid:0)𓆑
𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓄥𓅱𓀀𓏥(cid:0)𓆑𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓌻(cid:0)
𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓀀𓁐𓏥(cid:0)𓆑𓁹(cid:0)𓅱𓐍(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏛(cid:0)𓏥𓈖𓊃(cid:0)𓊪(cid:0)𓊗𓇋𓊪

(cid:0)𓈖𓁶(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓇾(cid:0)𓏤(cid:0)𓈇𓊃(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓈖𓂻(cid:0)𓆑𓂺(cid:0)𓏏𓎛𓈖(cid:0)𓏏𓁐
𓆑𓌻(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓏏𓆑𓂋(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏛𓈖(cid:0)𓆑
Grant ye this Sepȧ, he may traverse heaven, he may traverse
earth, he may traverse the waters, he may meet his ancestors, he
may meet his father, he may meet his mother, he may meet his
children and his brothers and sisters, he may meet his friends, he
may meet his uncles and aunts, he may meet his connexions, he
may meet his friends who did things for this Sepȧ upon earth, he
may meet his woman [whom] he loved and knew, etc.
𓆷𓄿𓃀𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓀾
[23] In Egyptian, Shabti, or Ushebti
𓅱𓈚𓃀𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓀾 𓆷𓄿𓍯𓄿𓃀𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓀾 𓆷𓍯𓃀𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓀾, or Shauabti,; in
the plural, Shabtiu, or Ushabtiu.
[24] E. g., No. 1031 (389), Bay 27.
[25] Strictly speaking the serdâb is a lofty, vaulted,
subterranean chamber, with a large opening in the north side to
admit air in the hot weather.
[26] The word “pyramid” seems to be derived from the
𓉐(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓂻𓅓𓅱𓋴𓉐
Egyptian PEREMUS, which probably means “a
building with a sloping side.”
[27] The Coptic names are derived from the ancient Egyptian
𓅝(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏭𓀭
names; thus “THOTH” is from, whose festival was
celebrated in that month. “Choiak” is from the name of the
𓂓(cid:0)𓏤𓁷(cid:0)𓏤𓂓(cid:0)𓏤𓎱(cid:0)𓇳(cid:0)𓏦
festival Ḳaḥrȧka, and so on.
𓈚(cid:0)𓈗
[28] We should naturally expect to represent the
whole period of the Inundation, and not merely the first two or
𓆷𓏏(cid:0)𓇳
three weeks of it; and cannot originally have referred at
all to the period of the Inundation. This subject, however, is one
of difficulty.
[29] A second Tablet of Abydos, made for Rameses II, is
exhibited in the Northern Egyptian Gallery, Bay 6, No. 592.
[30] To these may be added the fragment of a stele (now
preserved at Palermo), from which the names of a few of the
Predynastic kings of Lower Egypt have been recovered.

[31] He says: “The Egyptians in the formation of their Great
Year had no regard to the moon. In Greece the Egyptian Year is
called ‘cynical’ (dog-like), and in Latin ‘canicular’ because it
commences with the rising of the Canicular or Dog-star, to which
is fixed the first day of the month which the Egyptians called
Thoth. Their civil year had but 365 days without any intercalation.
Thus with the Egyptians the space of four years is shorter by one
day than the space of four natural years, and a complete
synchronism is only established at the end of 1,461 years.”
(Chapter XVIII.) “But of these [eras] the beginnings always take
place on the first day of the month which is called Thoth among
the Egyptians, a day which this present year corresponds to the
VIIth day of the Kalends of July (June 25), whilst a hundred years
ago... this same day corresponded to the XIIth day of the
Kalends of August (July 21), at which time the Dog-star is wont to
rise in Egypt.” (Chapter XXI.)
[32] The name of the king is not given, but Ȧmenemḥāt III
must be referred to.
𓇓𓏏(cid:0)𓈖𓂋(cid:0)𓐍(cid:0)𓏛
[33] suten rekh, “royal kinsman.” The
title of “royal kinsman” was often bestowed upon officials by
kings as a reward for faithful services; Ȧmenemḥāt means that
his title was not honorary.
𓆷𓇓𓅱𓈉
[34] The word Shasu means primarily “robber,” and is
the “land of the robber,” i. e., the nomad desert man, who
plundered caravans at every opportunity. Later, Shasu
𓆷𓄿𓇓𓅱𓀀𓁐𓏪, means merely “pastoral desert tribes.”
[35] It was discovered at Ṣân (Tanis) by Mariette, who had the
inscription copied; the stele was then carefully buried, and it has
not since been seen.
[36] Tell al-Amarna Tablet at Berlin, No. 24.
[37] Full descriptions of all the tablets have been published by
the Trustees of the British Museum, with summaries of the
contents and the texts in The Tell al-Amarna Tablets in the
British Museum, Autotype plates, 1892, 8vo. Price 28s.; and
see the Guide to the Babylonian and Assyrian Collections,
Second Edition, 1908, pp. 177-192.
[38] E. g., 2,756 images of the gods, 113,433 men, 490,386
oxen and cattle, 1,071,780 aruras of land, 514 vineyards, 160

towns, 71,000 bundles of flax, 6,272,431 loaves of bread,
19,130,032 bundles of vegetables, 1,933,766 jars of honey,
5,279,552 bushels of corn, etc.
𓁹(cid:0)𓊨(cid:0)𓀭𓍹(cid:0)𓋹𓈖(cid:0)𓋴𓇳𓄤𓄣(cid:0)𓍺
[39]
𓐙(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓂝𓁹(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓈖𓇓𓈞(cid:0)𓏏𓅨(cid:0)𓏏𓁶(cid:0)𓊪𓈖𓍛𓏤(cid:0)𓆑𓍹(cid:0)𓏏
𓄿𓆼𓍯𓍿(cid:0)𓍺𓏏𓅐𓋴𓊹𓂧(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓏤𓍹(cid:0)𓋋(cid:0)𓏏(cid:0)𓆇𓇋𓈎(cid:0)𓂋(cid:0)𓍺𓐙 𓊤.
[40] The hieroglyphic form of her prenomen is
𓍹(cid:0)𓇋𓏠(cid:0)𓈖𓂝(cid:0)𓂋𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓍺
and her nomen was
𓍹(cid:0)𓎡(cid:0)𓈖𓍘𓇋𓎱𓇌𓏏(cid:0)𓆇(cid:0)𓍺
Kenthȧḥebit, whence, probably,
the title Candace is derived. Her tomb is at Meroë (Northern
Group of Pyramids, No. 1).
[41] I. e., the portion of the Nile Valley between Syene and
Hierasykaminos, which was 12 schoeni (hence the name), or 70
miles, in length.
[42] Copies and translations of most of the Greek and Coptic
inscriptions have been published by the Trustees of the British
Museum in “Coptic and Greek Texts of the Christian Period
from Ostraka, Stelae, etc., in the British Museum.” With
100 plates. 1905. Foolscap. £2.
[43] The word Khalîfa means “successor,” i. e., of the Prophet.
[44] The word Mamlûk means “slave.”
𓍹(cid:0)𓆼𓊸𓃝𓆷𓀼(cid:0)𓍺 𓍹(cid:0)𓆼𓃝𓆷𓈘𓀭(cid:0)𓍺
[45] Variants,,.

INDEX.
Ȧa, 17
Ȧā-ȧb, King, 293
Āa-ȧb-taui-Rā, 293
Ȧāḥ-ḥetep, Queen, 227
Ȧāḥmes I, 115, 153, 227, 228, 287, 294
Ȧāḥmes II, 260, 288, 300
Ȧāḥmes-nefert-Ȧri, 164
Āa-kheper-en-Rā, 294
Āa-kheper-ka-Rā, 294
Āa-kheper-Rā, 299
Āa-kheper-Rā setep-en-Ȧmen (Osorkon IV), 299
Āa-kheper-Rā setep-en-Menthu, 298
Āa-kheperu-Rā, 295
Āamu, 206, 210, 211
Āa-peḥ (Nubti), 225
Āa-peḥ-ti-Set, 294
Āa-qenen-Rā (Ȧpepȧ II), 226, 293
Āasith, goddess, 131
Ȧati, 16
Āa-user-Rā, King, 225
Ȧb-ȧā, King, 223

Abâî, River, 11
Āb-ȧst, 203
ʿAbbâsid Khalîfas, 285
ʿAbd-Allah bin Sa’ad, 283
ʿAbd al-Laṭîf, 162
ʿAbd as-Salâm, 285
Abhat, 73, 232
Abraam, stele of, 284
Abrasax, 282
Abraxas, 282
Ȧbt, 16
Ābu, Elephantine, island of, 1, 16, 85
Abukîr, lake of, 5
Abû Roâsh, pyramids of, 170
Abû-Simbel, temple of, 73, 108, 242
Abû-Ṣîr, 17, 203, 204;
pyramids of, 170
Abydos, 145, 188, 215;
tablets of, 208, 240, 245;
temple of, 240
Abyssinia, 20, 280
Acacia, 89, 138
Achoris, 264
Acrobats, 87
Adam, 165
Adramîya, cataract of, 13

Addresses of Horus, 67
Aegyptus, 4
Ælius Gallus, 275
Ȧfȧ, relief of, 203
Affidavits, Coptic, 284
Africans, 20
Africanus, Julius, 185, 208, 264
Ȧfu-Rā, 66
Agricultural implements, 96
Agriculture, 22, 92
Āḥa, tomb of, 188
Ahnâs, 16, 209
Ȧi, 238, 287, 296
Aiguptos, 4
Akabah, 4
Åkerblad, 44
Akhaemenes, 263
Akhet, season of, 182
Akhmîm, 16, 100, 164
Al-Arîsh, 4
Albert Nyanza, 11
Alexander I the Great, 162, 266, 289, 302
Alexander II, 266, 289, 302
Alexandria, 19, 277, 280;
founded, 266;
patriarch of, 283

Alexandrian Library and Museum, 268
Alexandros, 270
Al-Hîbah, 16
Al-Kâb, 16, 234
Al-Kês, 16
Al-Khârgah, Oasis of, 262, 263
Al-Kusîyah, 16
Al-Lâhûn, 215;
pyramids of, 170, 172
Al-Mâmûn, 201
Alpha, 282, 284
Alphabet, the Egyptian, 49, 50, 270
Altar stands, 101
Altars, stone, 222
Alwa, 283
Āmamu, coffin of, 58, 178
Ȧm-Ȧnnu, 126
Ȧm-Āntchet, 126
Amârah, 73
Amāsis I, 227, 228
Amāsis II, 260;
and see Ȧāḥmes.
Ȧmen, god, 129;
incarnation of, 232;
temple of, founded, 232
Ȧmenȧrṭās, Queen, 115, 256, 257

Ȧmen-Ȧsru, King, 235
Ȧmen-em-ȧnt, stele of, 246
Ȧmen-em-Ȧpt, King, 251, 288;
stele of, 229
Ȧmenemḥāt I, 172, 212, 213, 287, 293;
instructions of, 68, 213
Ȧmenemḥāt II, 172, 214, 215, 287, 293
Ȧmenemḥāt III, 172, 255, 287, 293
Ȧmenemḥāt IV, 219, 287, 293
Ȧmenemḥāt, an official, 215
Ȧmenemḥāt, a royal kinsman, 221
Ȧmen-em-ḥāt, stele of, 238
Ȧmen-em-ḥeb, a scribe, 251
Ȧmen-ḥetep I, 229, 287, 294
Ȧmen-ḥetep II, 153, 231, 232, 255, 287, 295
Ȧmen-ḥetep III, 72, 153, 164, 179, 232-236, 287, 295
Ȧmen-ḥetep IV, 115, 179, 233, 236, 237, 287, 295;
and see Khu-en-Ȧten.
Ȧmen-ḥetep, a high-priest, 250
Ȧmen-ḥetep, an Erpā, 235
Ȧmen-ḥetep, an officer, 232
Ȧmen-ḥetep, a scribe, 261
Ȧmen-ḥetep, son of Ḥāp, 235
Ȧmeni, an official, 214
Ȧmeni, figure of, 221
Ȧmeni, Prince, 219

Ȧmeni, stele of, 221
Ȧmeni, the builder, 217
Ȧmen-men, stele of, 229
Ȧmen-mes, King, 248;
palette of, 55
Ȧmen-meses, 287, 296
Ȧmen-Rā, god, 123, 129, 266;
boat of, 70;
priests of, 226, 238, 251, 252;
temple of, at Karnak, 231;
temple of, at Khârgah, 263;
temple of, at Napata, 257
Ȧmen-Rā-mes, stele of, 248
Ȧmen-ruṭ-meri-Ȧmen, 263, 264
Ȧment, Ȧmentet, 17, 239
Ȧmenṭārit, Queen, 275
Ȧmenti, 139
Ȧm-f-khent, 16
Ȧm-f-peḥ, 16
Ȧm-ḥetch-paār, 126
Ȧm-Ḥet-Serqet, 126
Ȧm-Ḥet-ur-Rā, 126
Ȧm-Khent, 16, 17
Ām-mit, 140, 144
Ȧm-neter-ḥet, 126
Ȧm-peḥ, 16, 17

ʿAmr ibn al-Âṣî, 278
Ȧm-Saḥ, 126
Ȧmset, 123, 161
Ȧmsu, 123, 128, 238;
and see Menu.
Ȧm-Ṭep, 126
Amulets, 53, 100, 179;
list of, 147-150;
pre-dynastic, 148;
Gnostic, 282
Ȧm-Unnu-meḥt, 126
Ȧm-Unnu-resu, 126
Amusements, 84 ff.
Amyrtaios, 263, 264, 289
Ȧn, 203, 287, 291
Anaemia, 73
Ȧnaitis, 248
Anatomy, 32, 72
Ancestors, worship of, 189
Ȧneb-ḥetch, 17
Ȧnebni, statue of, 231
Ȧnhai, papyrus of, 61, 146, 153
Ȧn-ḥer-nekht, 217;
stele of, 221
Ani, maxims of, 146;
papyrus of, 53, 59;

shrine of, 239
Animal food, 82
Ȧnit, 125
Ankarîb, 90
Ānkh amulet, 149
Ȧn-kheft-ka, statue of, 109, 114, 203
Ānkh-f-en-Khensu, 152
Ānkh-ḥaf, 203
Ānkh-ka-en-Rā, 300
Ānkh-kheperu-Rā, 295
Ānkhnes-nefer-ȧb-Rā, sarcophagus of, 260
Ānkh-p-kharṭ, statue of, 262
Ānkh-sen-Ȧmen, Queen, 238
Anna, stele of, 239
Annals of kings, 73
Annihilation of the wicked, 144
Ȧnnu (On, Heliopolis), 17
Ȧnpu (Anubis), 127;
of Sepau, 212;
brother of Batau, 69, 70
Ānqet, 125, 129
Ȧntef (dynasty XI), King, 210
Ȧntef, inscription of, 212, 222
Ȧntef, an official, 73, 210, 212
Ȧntef, a priest, 221
Ȧntef, statue of, 214

Ȧntef (Nub-kheper-Rā), relief of, 226, 292
Ȧntef Uaḥ ānkh, King, 292
Ȧntefȧ, the Erpā, 209, 210, 292
Ȧntef-āa I, 210, 226, 292
Ȧntef-āa II, 292
Ȧntef-āa III, 292
Ȧntef-āa, coffin of, 226;
pyramid of, 226
Ȧntef-Ȧqer-ānkh-khu, 224
Antelope, 82
Ānthȧt, 125, 130, 248
Anthony, St., the Great, 163, 280
Ānthrethȧ, 130
Ānti (myrrh), 21, 211
Antimony, 81
Antinoopolis, 277
Antinous, 277
Antiochus the Great, 270
Ȧntḳes, tablet for offerings of, 207
Antoninus, 279
Antony, 272
Ȧntuf, song of, 75
Anubis (see Ȧnpu), 123, 127
Apachnas, King, 225
Apakene, St., 283

Āpep, 31, 142, 267
Ȧpepȧ I, 218, 225, 293
Ȧpepȧ II, 226, 293
Āpepi, 67
Āpepi, king of Avaris, 74
Apes, dog-headed, 21
Āpesh, 132
Aphroditopolis, 16
Apis Bull, 93, 131, 191, 263
Apis Chapels, 234
Ȧpit, 131
Ȧpni, stele of, 235
Apollinopolis Magna, 16
Apophis, King, 225
Apries (Ḥophra), 259, 300
Apse, 283
Āpshait, 132
Ȧpt, a measure, 98
Ȧpu (Panopolis), 16, 99
Ȧpu, figure of, 238
Ȧp-uat-em-sau-f, King, 224
Ȧqer, stele of, 212
Āqleq, 257
Arab Period, 282
Arabia, 22, 98

Arabic language, spread of, 282
Arabs conquer Egypt, 278
Arch, the elliptical, 103
Archaïc Period, 193
Archangels, the Six, 282
Architecture, 103 ff.
Ȧri, relief of, 203
Ariel, 82, 85
Ȧri-neferu, figure of, 238
Ar-Rafah, 4
Arrows, flint-tipped, 86
Arsaphes, 245
Arsinoë, Queen, 269;
city of, 269
Ȧrsu, 249, 287
Artatama, 232
Artaxerxes I, 263, 288, 301
Artaxerxes II, 266, 301
Artaxerxes III, 266, 288
Artemidorus, mummy of, 163;
stele of, 279
Ȧsȧ-ānkh, 205
Ȧsȧr (Osiris), 124, 127
Ȧsȧr-Ḥāp (Serapis), 124, 268
Ȧset, Queen, 230
Ashmnûnên, 16

Ashur-bani-pal, 257, 258
Ȧspelta, 261
Ass, 95
Ȧssȧ, 68, 87, 203, 204, 287, 291
Assessors, the Forty-two, 141
Assis, 225
Assyria, 97, 257
Assyrians occupy Memphis, 257;
sack Thebes, 258
Ȧst (Isis), 125, 127
Astaboras, 13
Astapos, 11
Astasobas, 13
Ȧst-em-khebit, 253
Āsthȧrethit, 130
Astronomy, 71, 80
Aswân, 16, 18, 285;
the Dam at, 13;
tombs at, 173
Asyûṭ, 16, 18, 139, 209;
Princes of, 208
Ȧta, 189, 286
Āṭȧb, King, 190, 286
Atbara, 13
Ātchȧb, King, 190
Ȧtefthit, 18

Ȧten, the solar disk, 130;
hymn to, 27;
prayers to, 238;
cult and temple of, 237
Ȧtet (dynasty I), 189
Ȧteth, 189, 286
Atfîḥ, 16
Athanasius, 163
Athenians, 263
Ȧthi, 17;
stele of, 214
Athribis, 17, 224, 245
Ȧthu, stele of, 232
Athyr, month of, 183
Ȧtmu, 124
Ȧu-ȧb-Rā, King, 287, 293
Ȧuputh, 253
Autoba, 18
Ȧuuaruath, Prince, 256
Avaris, 74, 225, 228
Ayyûbid Khalîfas, 285
Axe, 178, 188
Axe-handle of Sekhem-uatch-taui-Rā, 223
A-Zandê, 157, 158
Azhar, 285

Ba (Ram-god), 131
Baal, 131, 242
Bâb al-Mandib, 22
Babylonia, 22, 97, 98
Bachis Bull, 93, 131
Back-bone amulet, 149
Bad-Face, 141
Ba-en-neter, 286, 290
Ba-en-Rā-neteru meri, 302
Bagrawîr, 17;
pyramids of, 170
Baḥarîyah, Oasis of, 5
Baḥêrah, 18
Bahnassâ, 16
Baḥr al-Abyaḍ, 11
Baḥr al-Gebel, 11
Baḥr al-Ghazâl, province of, 19, 228
Baḥr Yûsuf, 6
Bāirthȧ (Beltis), 131
Bakāa, stele of, 246
Ba-ka-Rā, 300
Bakenrenf, 256
Baker, 101
Bakha (Bachis Bull), 131
Bakhet, 145

Baḳḳârah, 93
Baḳṭ, 283
Balance, the Great, 140
Balbillus, F. Claudius, 277
Balls, 78
Ban-āa, stele of, 239
Ba-nefer, 53
Bangle, 179
Bankes, Mr., 45
Bantu, 157
Baptism, 281
Bār (Baal), 131, 242
Ba-Rā-meri-en-Ȧmen, 296
Barber, 101
Barges, 102
Barley, 22, 82
Barley-beer, 83
Barrage at Al-Manâshî, 14;
at Asyûṭ, 13;
at Esna, 14
Barter, 98
Barthélemy, 44
Baskets, 99
Basket-weaver, 99
Bas-relief, 110
Bast, 128, 132;

temple of, 254
Batau, brother of Ȧnpu, 69, 70
Batau-ānth, 245
Battle-axe, 121
Ba-ur-ṭeṭ, 204
Beads, 179
Beans, 82
Bear, 85
Beard, the pointed, 21
Bebi, King, 193, 286
Bedsteads, 90
Beer, barley, 83;
honey, 83
Beer-house, 87
Beetle, granite, 273
Beetle amulet, 147
Beetle-god, 132
Begig, 214
Behbît al-Ḥagârah, 265
Behen, 214
Behent, 18
Behenu, relief of, 207
Bekhten, 70
Bekt, 18
Bells, 87, 178

Beltis, 131
Belzoni, 199, 245
Benben, 236
Benha, 18, 245
Beni Hasan, 172
Beni-Suwêf, 18
Bennu, 124, 132
Beon, King, 225
Berber, province of, 19
Berenice, Queen, 270;
city of, 240;
stele of, 274
Berenice Troglodytica, 268
Bêrût, 70, 242
Bes, god, 124, 129
Besh, King, 117, 150, 191, 286, 290
Bêt al-Walî, temple of, 241, 242
Betchau, King, 189, 190, 286, 290
Betchmes, statue of, 114, 195
Bêt Khallâf, 193
Bier, 211
Bier-cloth, 165, 285
Bilâk (Philae), 18
Biography, 73
Birkat al-Ḳurûn, 5
Bîshârî tribes, 20

Bitter Lakes, 5
Bitumen, 158, 162
Blacks, 120;
edict against, 216;
land of, 215
Blacksmith, 100
Blacksmith-god (Ptaḥ), 119
Blemmyes, 20, 277, 278
Block of slaughter, 144
Blood of Isis, 149
Blue Nile, province of, 19
Boat-builder, 101
Boats of different kinds, 102
Bocchoris (Bak-en-ren-f), 256, 288, 299
Body, the material, 155;
the glorified, 143, 155
Boheiric dialect, 35
Bok, 18
Bolt-lock, 91
Bone-setting, 72
Book of Breathings, 62
Book of coming forth by day, 58
Book of Ecclesiasticus, 69
Book of gates, 66, 142;
vignette, 141
Book of “May my name flourish”, 64

Book of Opening the Mouth, 64
Book of overthrowing Āpepi, 67
Book of Proverbs, 69
Book of the Dead, 178;
editing of, 189;
recensions of, 58 ff.
Book of the Two Ways, 65
Book of traversing eternity, 63
Book of what is in the Ṭuat, 66
Books of Magic, 74
Boomerangs, 21, 85, 238
Boôn, 18
Borers, flint, 188
Botany, 72
Boussard, 44, 270
Bow and arrows, 86, 98, 178
Bowls, earthenware, stone, wood, etc., 92, 178
Boxes, 91, 178
Bracelets, 179, 253
Bran, 82
Bread, bread-cakes, 82;
imperishable, 143
Breastplate, 179
Brick, invention of, 103;
brick-making, 22;
brickmaker, 100

Bricks, inscribed, 230, 231
Brugsch, Dr. H., 186
Bubastis, 17, 216, 224, 245;
temple of, 254
Buffoons, 87
Buhen, 121
Buiu-uaua, 253
Bull, Apis, 93, 131, 191;
Bachis, 93, 131;
Mnevis, 93, 131, 191;
of Ȧmen-tet, 93;
worship of, 93
Bûrlûs, lake of, 5
Burraburiyash, letter of, 236
Busiris, 17
Bu-tchamui, 16
Buto, 17, 138, 267;
temple of, 74
Buzzard, 85
Caesar, Julius, 272, 302
Caesarea, 185
Caesarion, 272
Cairo, 19;
Old, 285
Calendar, 32, 270;
year, 184

Calendars, 71;
of lucky and unlucky days, 182
Cambyses, 74, 261, 262, 288, 301
Camel, 95
Canal in First Cataract, 216
Candace, 170, 275, 276
Canopic jars, 160, 177
Canopus, 160, 279;
decree of, 270
Cap, the soldiers’, 120
Caracalla, 277
Cardinal points, 145
Carding instruments, 165
Carians, 258
Caricatures, 112
Carpenter, 100
Carpets, 91
Cartography, 71
Cartonnage cases, 162
Cartouche, 45, 191;
origin of, 117
Cassia, 159
Cat, 78, 132;
hunting, 85
Cat-goddess, 132
Cataract, Canal in the First, 216

Cataracts, the Six on the Nile, 13
Cattle-breeding, 92;
men, 93;
Sûdânî, 92, 93
Cedar oil, 160
Censers, 198
Censorinus, 186
Chairs, 91, 98, 178
Champollion, 45, 270
Chapter of the Heart, 178
Chariot, 121
Cheese, 82
Cheops, 59, 196, 286, 290
Chephren, 171, 199, 232, 287, 290
Cherubs, 165
Chimney, 92
Choiak, season of, 183
Chosroës, 278
Christianity in Egypt, 277;
in Nubia, 280
Christians, persecution of, 277
Chronicles of Africanus and Eusebius, 185
Chronography, 185
Chronology, 71, 184;
systems of, 187
Churches in the Sûdân, 283

Clay sealings, 189
Cleopatra, the Queens, 271, 272, 289, 302
Cleopatra’s Needle, 231
Clepsydra, 266, 267
Clerestory, 273
Clubs, 86
Coffins, classes of, 177, 273
Coinage, 262
Collar, amulet, 149;
gold, 81
Colleges, 79
Colonnade, 105
Colossi, the, 234, 236, 277
Colour-pot, 178
Comb, 91, 178
Cone, 81;
memorial, 223
Confectioner, 101
Confession, 281
Conscience, 149
Constantine, 278
Contracts, Coptic, 284
Cooking-pots, 92
Copper, 98;
mines, 204, 240;
vases, 191

Coppersmith, 100
Coptic, dialects of, 35;
inscriptions, 56;
language, 39, 280
Coptos, 16, 226, 231
Copts, 45;
doctrine of, 280
Corn, export of, 97;
bin, 92;
grinder, 92
Cornelius Gallus, 275
Coronation, stele of, 261
Corvée, the celestial, 151
Cosmogony, 79
Cosseir, 204
Couches, 98, 178
Counters, 178
Court of temple, 105
Cow of Hathor, 262
Cow, worship of, 94
Creation of the gods, 135;
of men, 136;
of the world, 74, 134
Crete, 249
Crocodile amulet, 148;
god, 131;
lake, 5;

mummies, 218;
wax, 71;
worship of in modern times, 85
Cross, the, 164, 280, 284
Crosses, Coptic, 284
Crow, 85
Crown, the White, 189, 190
Crucifixion, 282
Cubit, the little, 98;
the royal, 98
Cucumbers, 82
Cupboards, 91
Curds, 92
Currency, 98
Cush, 20, 214
Cushites, 20
Cylinder seals, 219
Cymbals, 87, 178
Cyprus, 70, 97, 98, 249
Dagger, 120, 178
Dahshûr, 172, 196, 217;
pyramids of, 170
Dailah, Oasis of, 5
Daily Ritual of the Divine Cult, 67
Dakhâlîyah, 18

Dâkhlah, Oasis of, 5
Dakkah, 243, 268, 270
Damanhûr, 18
Damietta, 19
Dance of the god, 87, 204
Dancing, 31, 86;
women, 87
Daphnae, 258
Dâr Fûr, 92
Darius I, 262, 288, 301
Darius II, 263, 288, 301
Darius III, 289
Dates, 82
David, 253;
a monk, 281
Days, lucky and unlucky, 32, 182;
the five epagomenal, 182
Dead, eater of, 140
Death, universal, 274
Decius, 277, 281
De Guignes, 44
Dekans, the Thirty-six, 71, 175
Delta, 4, 5, 138, 140
Demoniacal possession, 70
Demotic writing, 37
Denderah, 16, 207, 230, 268, 272, 273

Dêr al-Baḥarî, temples at, 210, 230;
royal mummies found at, 254
Deserts of Egypt, 6, 7
Destruction of Mankind, 74
Determinatives, 51
Devil, 133
Dhurra, 82
Dialogue between a man and his soul, 28
Dice, 87, 178
Diocletian, 277, 278, 281
Diodorus Siculus, 20, 98, 160, 198, 242
Dioskle, 56
Dioskoros, 56
Diospolis Magna, 17;
Parva, 16
Disk amulet, 150
Doctrine of retribution, 142
Dodekaschoinos, 18, 277
Dog-god, 132
Dog River, 242
Dog-star, 184, 186
Dogs, hunting, 86
Dolls, 78, 101, 178
Dominoes, 87
Dongola, 4, 278;
province of, 19

Door, wooden, 239;
socket, 215
Doomed Prince, story of, 70
Double (K ), 155
A
Dove, 83, 164
Draughtboards and draughtsmen, 87
Draughts, 87, 178
Dream, stele of the, 258
Dress, 80 ff.
Drum, 87
Drunkard, 88
Duck, 83
Dulgo, 240
Du Theil, 44
Dyer, 101
Dynasties, Arab, 285;
Egyptian, 188, 286
Eagle, 85
Ears, on stele, 239
Eater of the Dead, 140, 144;
of shades, 141
Ebers Papyrus, 72
Ebony, 21, 98;
tablets of Āḥa, 189
Ecclesiasticus, 30

Edfû, 16, 68, 231, 240, 268, 271;
temple of, 104, 270
Edkû, lake of, 5
Education, 78
Egg-plant, 82
Egypt, gods of, 122;
history of, 188 ff.;
land and divisions of, 1 ff.;
peoples of, 20;
population of, 35
Egyptian, decipherment, 41 ff.;
language and writing, 35 ff.;
Travels of an, 70
Egyptians, African origin of, 20;
manners and customs of, 76 ff.
Eiḥannes, 56
Eileithyiaspolis, 16
Elephant, 78, 85, 86;
city, 85;
hunts, 270
Elephantine, city and island of, 1, 16, 85, 173, 206, 215, 216,
258, 277
Embalming, methods of, 158 ff.
Embalmment, ritual of, 64
Embroidery, 164
Enamelling, 100
Enchorial writing, 37

Enemies of Osiris and Rā, 143
Enneads, 123
En-neter, King, 191
Epilepsy, 73
Epiphanes, 39, 44, 270
Epiphi, month of, 183
Equatorial Africa, Negro tribes of, 20
Era of martyrs, 281
Ergamenes, 270
Erpā, 117
Erṭā-Ȧntef-Ṭāṭāu, stele of, 73, 221
Erṭā-en-ānkh, false door of, 207
Esarhaddon, 257
Esna, 4, 5, 92, 231, 268, 272;
church of, 283
Ethiopia, 13, 214
Euergetes I, 39, 269
Euergetes II, 271, 302
Euonymos, stele of, 273
Eupator, 271
Euphrates, 86, 234, 259
Euripides, 56
Eusebius, 185
Eve, 165
Eye amulet, 149;
of Horus, 149;

of Rā, 149;
-paint, 81, 91, 159, 178
Eyes on stele, 239
Exodus, 247
Exports, 97
Fairies, 133
Fakûs, 17
Falcon, 85
False door, 173;
gods, 142;
pyramid, 195
Famine, a seven years’, 166, 193
Famines, 14, 97
Fan, 82, 98
Farâfrah, Oasis of, 5
Farmer, 92
Farmhouse, 89
Fasts, 281
Fâṭimid Khalîfas, 285
Fattening, artificial, 82
Fayyûm, 6, 18, 214, 268, 269;
dialect of, 36;
map of, 71
Feast, funeral, 211
Feather, symbol of Maāt, 140

Feathers, 120
Fellaḥ, 120
Ferry-boat, 102
Festival songs of Isis and Nephthys, 63
Festivals, 281;
of the Nile, 14
Fetishes, 123
Fever, 73
Fiction, 69
Field of Peace, 140, 143;
of Reeds, 140
Figs, 82, 143
Figures, magical, 31
Finger, a measure, 98;
rings, 179
Fingers amulet, 149
Fire, 92;
Lake of, 144;
stick, 92
Fish, 82;
eaters of unclean, 82;
amulet, 148;
gods and goddesses, 133;
hooks, 84;
ponds, 89;
spears, 85
Fishing, 84

Fist, a measure, 98
Flame, 142
Flax, 99, 164
Fleets of Rameses III, 249;
of Nekau, 258
Flints, fire struck from, 92
Flowers, 89
Fluid of life, 117, 223
Flute, 87
Followers of Horus, 139, 153
Food, 82
Forced labour, 152, 153
Forks, 92
Fort St. Julien, 44
Forts, 121
Fosṭâṭ, 285
Foundation deposits, 258
Fowling, 84
Fox, 85
Fractions, 181
Frog amulet, 151
Frontonius, 280
Fruits, 82
Fuel, 92
Furniture, 90, 100

Gabriel, Duke, 279
Gall bladder, god of, 161
Games with counters, 87
Gap, 145
Gardens, 89
Garlic, 82
Gazelle, 82, 85
Gazelle River, 13
Gazîrat al-Malik, 216
Gebel Barkal, 232, 261;
pyramids of, 170
Gebel Dôsha, 216
Gebel Sahaba, 4
Gebel Zâbarâ, 240
Geese, various kinds of, 180
Geography, 71
Geometry, 71
George, St., 165, 284
George the Monk, 185
Gergorios, 57
Germanos, 56
Gharbîyah, 18
Gilukhipa, 233
Giraffe, 86;
river, 13
Girdle, 81;

amulet, 149;
wall, 109
Girgah, 18
Gîzah, 18;
pyramids of, 170, 196
Glass, 100;
glass beads, 179;
glass making, 100;
jug, 231
Glaze for pottery, 194
Gnostic amulets, 282
Gnostics, 282
Goat, 82, 95
God, Egyptian word for, 126
Gods, companies of, 126;
creation of, 135;
dance of the, 204;
enneads of, 123;
number of, 133;
triads of, 123
Gold, brought from the Sûdân, 214, 215;
export of to Assyria, 97, 98;
green, 21;
map of gold mines, 71;
mines, 240;
gold rings, 179;
gold ring-money, 21, 98;
trade in, 234

Goliath beetle, 177
Gondókoro, 4
Goose, 83
Goose-goddess, 132
Granary, 97
Granaries, 217;
of Joseph, 172
Grant of land, 206
Grapes, 82
Grasshopper-god, 132
Graves, predynastic, 165
Gravestones, Kûfî, 285
Great House of the Six, 207
Great House (Pharaoh), 117
Greek language and writings, 39, 268
Greeks, 268;
settle in Naukratis, 258
Green gold, 21
Green water in the Nile, 13
Gulf of Akabah, 4;
of Solum, 4
Ḥa, 16
Ḥā Prince, 118
Ḥāā-ȧb-Rā Uaḥ-ȧb-Rā, King, 259, 300
Hades, god, 268

Hadrian, 277, 281
Ḥaggi Ḳandîl, 237
Hair, modes of wearing, 81
Hairpins, 178
Hair tweezers, 91, 178
Haḳer, King, 264, 289, 301
Ḥalfah Province, 19
Halicarnassus, vase of Xerxes from, 263
Hall, hypostyle, 106
Hall of columns, 106, 243
Ham, 20
Hamites, 20
Ḥammâmât, quarries of, 213, 217
Hand, a measure, 98
Hand drum, 87
Handicrafts, 98
Hânês, 16
Ḥannek Cataract, 13
Ḥāp (Apis Bull), 93, 131, 191
Ḥāp (Ḥāpi), son of Horus, 124, 129, 161
Ḥāp (Ḥāpi), the Nile-god, 9, 124, 127, 254
Ḥāp-men, sarcophagus of, 262
Hare, 85
Harmachis, 236
Harness, 100

Harp, 87
Harper, Song of the, 75
Harpokrates-Ȧmen, 261
Harpoons, 85
Harris Papyrus, No. 1, 28, 74;
No. 500, 74
Ḥarua, figure of, 115
Harvest, 97
Hathor, 108, 125, 128, 205, 214, 239
Ḥātmeḥit, 17
Ḥātshepset, Queen, 21, 102, 107, 179, 230, 287, 295
Ḥau, 16
Ḥawârah, 172, 218;
pyramids, 170
Hawk, 85
Hawk amulet, 149
Hawk-god, 132
Headdress, 81
Head-rest amulet, 149
Hearst Papyrus, 72
Heart, 155;
god of the, 161;
weighed in the balance, 140
Heart amulet, 147
Heart scarab, 177, 179
Heaven, position of, 144

Ḥebennu, 16
Heb-peri, stele of, 207
Ḥebt, city of, 265
Ḥeḥu, 135
Ḥeḥut, 136
Ḥekau, 149
Hêlenê, stele of, 283
Heliopolis, 17, 93, 203, 237, 257;
bull-god of, 191;
high-priest of, 119
Hen measure, 98
Ḥen period, 181
Ḥenbiu-gods, 151
Ḥenna plant, 81
Ḥen-nekht, King, 193, 286, 290
Ḥennu, expedition of, to Punt, 211
Ḥent-taui, Queen, 252
Heptanomis, 15
Ḥep-ur, 9
Ḥeq-āṭ, 17
Ḥeqt, goddess, 150, 212
Ḥer, King, 201, 219, 287, 293
Ḥer-ȧbu, stele of, 273
Heraclius, 278
Herakleopolis Magna, 16, 209, 210, 216, 245;
princes of, 208

Heretic king, 115
Ḥer-Ḥeru, priest-king, 61, 251, 288, 298
Ḥeriu-shā, 213
Ḥer-Khuf in the Sûdân, 95, 206
Hermopolis Magna, 16;
gods of, 135
Hermopolis Minor, 17
Hermonthis, 16, 93, 231
Herodotus quoted, 26, 160, 198, 218
Heron, 85
Ḥeru, an architect, 239
Ḥeru (Horus), 127, 138
Ḥeru, papyrus of, 62
Ḥeru-Beḥuṭet, Wars of, 74
Ḥeru-em-ḥeb, King, 287, 296;
papyrus of, 61, 62;
stele of, 239
Ḥerui, 16
Ḥerukhuti-Kheperȧ-Rā-Temu, the Sphinx-god, 232
Ḥeru-nest (?)-taui (?), King, 293
Ḥeru-netch-tef-f, coffin of, 71
Ḥeru-pa-kharṭ (Harpokrates), 124
Ḥeru-sa-ȧtef, cast of stele of, 74, 261
Ḥeru-shefit, 245
Ḥeruṭāṭāf, 59, 201
Ḥeru-ur, 116

Ḥesbet, 17
Ḥesepti, King, 189
Ḥes-Peṭān-Ȧst, coffin of, 273
Ḥet-Benben, 237
Ḥetchefa, King, 193, 286
Ḥetch-Rā-setep-en-Ȧmen, 299
Ḥetch-kheper-Rā setep-en-Rā, 298
Ḥetep-ḥeres, 177, 198
Ḥetep-neteru, stele of, 224
Ḥetep-Sekhemui, King, 191, 286
Ḥet-Ḥeru (see Hathor), 125, 128
Ḥet-ka-Ptaḥ (Memphis), 4
Ḥet-Khent, 18
Ḥet-suten, 16
Ḥet-ta-ḥer-ȧbt (Athribis), 17
Hezekiah, 257
Hierakonpolis, 16
Hiera Sykaminos, 18, 277
Hieratic writing, 36
Hieroglyphic writing, 36
Hippopotamus, 84, 85, 262;
amulet, 148;
goddesses, 131;
relief of, 211
History, 73;
of Egypt, 188 ff.

Hittites, 73, 239, 241
Hoe, 86
Holy water, 57
Homer, 270
Honey, 72;
used in embalming, 162
Honey-beer, 83
Hooks, fishing, 84
Ḥophra (Apries), 259, 300
Horse, 95, 121
Horus, birth of, 74;
death of, 75;
resurrection of, 75;
followers of, 153;
four sons of, 129
Horus name, 116
Horus of gold name, 116
House of Books, 68
House of Eternity, 166
House-painter, 100
Houses, 88 ff.
Ḥu, King, 190, 286, 290
Ḥui, stelae of, 229
Hu-nefer, papyrus of, 59, 241
Ḥuni, King, 193, 286, 290
Hunting, 84;

cat, 85;
scenes, 195
Hyaena, 85
Hyksos, 218, 223 ff.;
period of, 225
Hymn in praise of learning, 69
Hymnology, 67
Hypselis, 16
Ibex, 85
Ibis, 85
Ibis-god, 132
Ibrîm, 18, 213
Ichneumon-god, 132
Ideographs, 50
I-em-ḥetep, 129, 287, 291
Imports, 97, 98
Inarôs, 263
Incense, 237
India, 98
Ink, 55;
green, 31;
ink-pot, 55
Inlaying, 100
Institut National, 44
Instructions of Ȧmen-em-ḥāt I, 68

Intestines, gods of, 161
Inundation of the Nile, cause of, 3;
period of, 165, 183
Ionians, 258
Iron sky, 145
Irrigation works, 218
Isak, 56
Isis, 14, 125, 127, 161;
history of, 138;
temples of, closed, 278;
wanderings of, 75
Islâm, 282
Isos, stele of, 283
Israelites, 74, 247
Issus, battle of, 266
Iuȧa, 233
Iusāaset, 129
Ivory, 21, 189;
carver, 101
Jackal, 85
Jackal-god, 132
Jacob, 160;
the Monophysite, 281
Jacobites, 280
Jah, 282

Jazîrat al-Malik, 121
Jeroboam, 253
Jerusalem, 253
Jewel-boxes, 101
Jeweller, the, 100
Jewellery, 179
Jews, 271;
in Egypt, 268
John, St., church of, 283
John the Deacon, 283
Jonias, King, 225
Joppa, legend of capture of, 74
Joseph, granaries of, 170
Josephus Flavius, 224
Josiah, king of Judah, 258
Judgment, the, 140
Julian the Apostate, 281
Julius Africanus, 185, 208, 264
Julius Caesar, 272, 302
Jupiter Ammon, Oasis of, 5, 262, 266
Justinian, 278
Ka, 155;
Ka-chamber, 155;
Ka-chapel, 169;
Ka-figure of Rameses II, 244;

Ka-priest, 155, 169;
Ka-statues, 177
Kabasos, 17
Kadashman-Bêl (or Kadashman-Enlil), 233, 236
Kadesh, 240, 242
Ka-ḥeseb, 17
Ḳaḥrȧka, 183
Ka-kau, King, 191, 286, 290
Kalâbshah, 241
Ḳalyûbîyah, 18
Ka-meri-Rā, King, 209
Ka-mes, King, 227, 294
Ka-mes, a king’s messenger, 234
Kamesu, figure of, 238
Ka-nefer, stele of, 196
Ka-nekht-khā-em-Uast, King, 256
Ḳanṭarah, 98
Ka-Qam, 17
Kaqemna, Precepts of, 30, 68, 83
Karaduniyash, 233, 236
Karāmā, Queen, 254
Karbaniti, 257
Karei, 234
Karkemish, 259
Karnak, 16, 102, 213;
obelisks of, 230;

temple of, 230, 231 ff.
Kasa, 16
Ka-semt, 17
Kash (Nubia), 214
Kashta, 256, 288, 299
Kassala, province of, 19
Ka-ṭep, statue of, 177, 197
Ḳeb, 124, 128
Ḳebti, 16
Kekui, 136
Kekuit, 136
Kembȧthet, 301
Kemen, stele of, 218
Ḳena, 18, 98, 204
Kent, goddess, 131, 248
Kerasher, papyrus of, 62
Ḳerḥ, 136
Ḳerḥit, 136
Kesem, 17
Kesi, 16
Ḳeṭ, a measure, 98
Key, 91
Khaȧu, 188, 286
Khā-ba, 203
Khabbesha, 263, 301

Khā-em-ḥrȧ, 39
Khā-em-Uast, the magician, figure of, 115, 246
Khā-f-Rā (Chephren), 199, 232, 255, 287, 290
Khā-kau-Rā, King, 293
Khalîfa, meaning of the name, 285
Khalîg Canal, 14
Khā-nefer-Rā (Sebek-ḥetep), 203, 223, 287
Khârgah, Oasis of, 5, 262
Khart-en-Khennu, tablet for offerings of, 207
Kharṭûm, 85, 231, 277;
province of, 19
Khā-Sekhemui, King, 190
Khasut, 17
Khati, King, 209
Khati, Prince of Siut, 209, 291
Khemennu, 16
Khennu, 201
Khensu, 124, 129
Khensu-ḥetep, door of, 239;
Precepts of, 30, 77, 88
Khensu-user, stele of, 211
Khent, King, 189
Khent-ȧbt, 17
Khenti Ȧmenti, 206
Khenti-em-semti, 215
Khenti-em-semt-ur, a priest, 215

Khent-kaut-s, 170
Khent-khat-ur, 215
Kheperȧ, god, 124, 128, 147, 273
Kheper-ka-Rā (Usertsen I), 293
Kheper-ka-Rā (Nektanebos), 302
Kheper-khā-Rā, King, 293
Kheper-kheperu-maāt-ȧri-Rā, 296
Kheper-Maāt-Rā setep-en-Rā, 298
Khephren, see Chephren.
Kherp, pyramid, 215
Kheru-āḥāu, 151
Kheta, 73, 239, 241, 242
Khian, lion of, 225, 226
Khnem-ȧb-Rā, King, 300
Khnem-ȧb-Rā-Men, statue of, 261
Khnem-maāt-Rā, 301
Khnemu, 15, 96, 124, 128, 135, 150, 214;
temple of, 234
Khnemu-ḥetep, 172;
false door of, 205;
stele of, 221
Khu, 156;
stele of, 221
Khu-en-Ȧten (Ȧmen-ḥetep IV), 237, 295
Khu-en-Rā setep-en-Rā, 297
Khufu (Cheops), 59, 72, 78, 196, 201, 255, 286, 290

Khufu-ānkh, sarcophagus of, 198
Khut, 196
Khut-Ȧten, city of, 236, 237
Khu-taui-Rā, King, 293
King, his divinity, 116 f.;
his five names, 117;
his power, 208
King Lists, 71, 185
Kings, cartouches of the, 290;
Tombs of the, 231
Kitchen utensils, 92
Kite, 85
Kneading stone, 92
Knives, 92
Knoumis, 282
Koḥl, 81
Kom Ombo, 279
Kordofân, province of, 19
Korosko, 213
Krôphi, 7
Ḳua-ṭep, Canopic jars of, 161;
coffin of, 86;
pillow of, 91
Kubbân, 18
Kûfî writing, 285;
inscription in, 165

Ḳuft, 16
Kulla, 170
Kummah, 1, 121, 216, 219
Kûrkûr, Oasis of, 5
Ḳurnah, temple of, 240
Kurrû, pyramids of, 170
Kusae, 16
Ḳuṣêr, 21, 98, 204
Kynonpolis, 16
Labyrinth, 218
Ladder amulet, 149
Ladder of heaven, 145
Lake Abukîr, 5
Lake Albert, 11
Lake Albert Edward, 11
Lake Bûrlûs, 5
Lake Edkû, 5
Lake, Fiery, 144
Lake Mareotis, 5
Lake Menzâlah, 5
Lake Moeris, 6, 217
Lake Nô, 11
Lake Ṣânâ, 11
Lake, the Temple, 108

Lake Timsaḥ, 5
Lake Victoria, 11
Lamentations of Isis and Nephthys, 62
Lamp, 91
Land of the Blacks, 215
Land of the Spirits, 204, 206
Lapis-lazuli paste, 98
Lark, 85
Lasso, 86
Latus, 133
Leap-year, 270
Leather-worker, 100
Lebanon, 98
Leeks, 82
Legal documents, 75
Legends, mythological, 74
Lêlat al-Nuḳtah, 14
Lentils, 82
Leopard, 85;
skins, 21
Lepidotus, 133
Letopolis, 17
Letters, Coptic, 284
Libation bowl, 262;
tank, 207
Library, Alexandrian, 268

Library, the Temple, 106
Libya, 247
Libyans, 20
Life amulet, 149;
fluid of, 117, 223;
tree of, 143
Lighters, 102
Linen, 80;
export of, 97;
weavers of, 99
Linen mummy swathings, inscribed, 178
Linenwork, 285
Linnet, 85
Lion, 85;
gods, 132;
hunts, 232;
the Hyksos, 226
Lions, red granite, 235
Lisht, pyramids of, 170, 172, 213
Litany of Osiris, 67
Litanies of Seker, 63
Liturgy, 283
Liturgy of funerary offerings, 65
Liver, god of, 161
Lock, 91
Loin cloth, 21, 81

Long-strider, 141
Lotus, 130
Lungs, god of, 161
Lute, 87
Luxor, temple of, 16, 243
Lykopolis, 16
Lynx, 85
Lynx-goddess, 132
Maā-kheru-Rā, King, 293
Maā-Rā-ur-neferu, Hittite princess, 242
Maamet, 18
Maāt, the goddess, 125, 130;
the divine plant, 143, 151;
symbol of, 153
Maāti goddesses, 150
Maāt-en-Rā, King, 293
Maāt-ka-Rā (Ḥātshepset), 295
Maāt-ka-Rā, Princess, 252
Maāt-ka-Rā, wife of Osorkon I, 254
Maāt-khā, 201
Madînat al-Fayyûm, 18
Madînat Habû, 105, 230;
temple of, 249
Maeotes, 133
Mafṭet, 132

Magic, books of, 74
Magical figures, 151, 152
Magicians, stories of, 71
Ma-ḥes, 131
Maḥetch, 16
Māḥu, figure of, 248;
statue of, 119;
stele of, 239
Mȧi-sherȧui, 78
Mait, 212
Mamlûks, Baḥrite, 285;
Circassian, 285
Man, Creation of, 135, 136
Man-god, 129, 153
Mañbattu, 157
Manetho, King List of, 185, 190, 208, 222, 264, 269
Mankind, Destruction of, 74
Manṣûrah, 18
Mantis-god, 132
Manu, 145
Manûfîyah, 18
Marcianus, 278
Marcus Aurelius, 277
Marea, 258
Mareotis, lake of, 5
Mark, St., 277, 279

Marriage, 76;
contracts of, 75
Martyrs, Era of, 281
Maruat, 17
Mary, stele of, 284
Masaherth, 251
Maṣṭaba tomb, 167, 194
Master of the robes, 221
Matar, 15
Maṭarîyah, 17
Mātchaiu, 213
Maten, 16
Mats, 98, 99
Matthaios, a priest, 56
Matting, 99
Meae, 18
Measures, 98
Meat, eaters of raw, 261
Mechir, month of, 183
Medicine, 32, 72;
book of, 190
Mediterranean Sea, 97
Mêdûm, pyramid of, 195, 203, 218
Megiddo, 230, 258
Meḥit, 18
Meḥt-en-usekht, 253

Meḥ-urit, 130
Mekha, 188, 286
Mekhu, 207
Mekkah, 285
Melkites, 281
Memnon, 232;
the vocal, 234
Memnonium, 234, 242
Memphis, 17, 93, 206, 213, 225;
council of, 44;
decree of, 270;
founding of, 189;
government removed from, 209;
high-priest of, 119;
occupied by Assyrians, 257;
by Persians, 261
Menȧ (Menes), 185, 188, 286, 290
Men-ȧst, 204
Menȧt amulet, 236
Menāt-birds, 181
Mendes, 17;
kings of, 264;
ram of, 191
Menelaus, 160
Menephthah I (see Mer-en-Ptaḥ), 234
Menes, 185, 188, 286, 290
Menḥet, 125

Men-ka-Rā, King, 208
Men-kau-Ḥeru, King, 203, 287, 291
Men-kau-Rā (Mykerinos), 59, 200, 87, 290
Men-kheper-Rā (dynasty XVIII), 295
Men-kheper-Rā (dynasty XXI), 251, 288, 300
Men-kheperu-Rā, 295
Men-maāt-Rā (Seti I), 296
Men-maāt-Rā setep-en-Rā, 298
Men-mȧ-Rā setep-en-Rā, 296
Men-peḥtet-Rā, 296
Men-nefert, 17
Menruil, 129
Menthu, 130, 242;
temple of, 234
Menthu-āa, statue of, 212
Menthu-ḥetep I, 210, 287, 292
Menthu-ḥetep II, 210, 287, 292
Menthu-ḥetep III, 210, 287, 292
Menthu-ḥetep IV, 210, 287, 292
Menthu-ḥetep V, 210, 287, 292
Menthu-ḥetep VI, 287
Menthu-ḥetep VII, 287
Menthu-ḥetep, coffin of, 58;
an official, 211;
a prince, 211
Menthu-Rā, 124, 231

Menti, 93
Menu (Ȧmsu), 123, 128, 238, 248
Menûf, 18
Menu-Nefer, stele of, 215
Menzâlah, lake of, 5
Mer-ānkh-Rā, 292
Merawi (Napata, or Gebel Barkal), 1
Merbapen, King, 190, 290
Mer-en-Ḥeru, King, 208
Mer-en-Ptaḥ I, 247, 296
Mer-en-Ptaḥ II, 218, 297
Mer-en-Ptaḥ ḥetep-ḥer-Maāt, 296
Mer-en-Rā I, 205, 287, 291
Mer-en-Rā II, 205, 287, 291
Meri-mes, prince of Cush, 234
Meri-Rā (Pepi I), 205, 292
Meroë, island of, 1, 17, 275
Meroïtic inscriptions, 277;
kingdom, 275
Merpeba, 190, 286, 290
Mer-seḳer, Queen, 224
Mer-shesu-Ḥeru, stele of, 211
Mert, 125, 212
Mert-tefs, 196
Merul, 129

Mer-ur (Mnevis Bull), 94, 131, 213
Mes, a K -priest, 248
A
Meskhenit, 130
Mesopotamia, 86, 103
Mesore, month of, 183
Messnȧu, stele of, 231
Mesthȧ, 129, 161
Mesuth-Rā, 288, 301
Metal-caster, 101
Metal-working, 22, 191
Metelis, 17
Metternich stele, 75
Military service, 119
Milk, 82
Millet, 82
Minyah, 18
Mirror, 82, 178
Mitani, 232, 233, 236
Mît-Rahînah, 17
Mizraim, 20
Mnevis, Bull, 93, 131, 191, 213
Moeris, Lake, 6, 217
Monasteries, 280
Money, stamped, 98
Mongalla, province of, 19

Monkeys, 21
Monophysites, 280
Monotheism, 134
Month, the calendar, 181
Months, the twelve, 182
Moon amulet, 149
Môphi, 7
Moral aphorisms, 75
Mother Isis, 149
Mother, power of the, 77
Muḥammad the Prophet, 278
Mu-Ḥāpi, 7
Mulberries, 82
Mummies, the royal, 252
Mummification, dynastic, 154, 159, 160;
predynastic, 161
Mummy, 158;
chamber, 169;
portraits, 162;
swathings, 164
Museum, Alexandrian, 268
Music, 31
Muslims, 282
Mut, goddess, 125, 129, 232, 253, 277;
temple of, 234
Mut-em-uȧa, Queen, 232

Mut-ḥetep, papyrus of, 61
Mut-Nefert, Queen, 230
Mu-ur (Moeris), 217
Mykerinos, 200, 287, 290
Myrrh, 21, 98, 159, 211
Nahr al-Kalb, 242
Naifaauruṭ I, 264, 289, 301
Nails, stained with ḥenna, 81
Nakhal (Nile), 9
Name, 78
Name-day, 78
Name, the good, 207
Names, magical, 31
N-Ȧntef-ȧqer, prayer of, 212
Napata, 1, 17, 229, 232, 235, 255, 257, 261, 276
Napoleon, 44
Napt (Napata), 17
Nār-mer, 189, 191
Narses, 278
Nȧstasen, stele of, 74
Natron Lakes, 5
Naukratis, 258, 259
Navy, 121
Nebȧ, stele of, 224

Neb-ḥap-Rā I, 84, 110, 111, 210, 229, 230, 292
Neb-ḥap-Rā II, 210, 292
Nebka-Rā, 286
Neb-khāu, King, 203
Neb-kheperu-Rā, 296
Neb-maāt-Rā, 295
Neb-peḥti-Rā, 294
Nebpu-Usertsen, stele of, 218
Nebseni, papyrus of, 53, 59, 146
Neb-taui-Rā, King, 210, 292
Nebt-ḥet (Nephthys), 125, 127
Nebti name, 116
Nebuchadnezzar II, 259, 260
Necho, 258, 288, 300
Necklaces, 179
Nefer amulet, 149;
pyramid, 204;
stele of, 214
Nefer-Ȧbt, 17
Nefer-Ȧment, 17
Nefer-ȧri, figure of, 224
Nefer-ȧri-ka-Rā, King, 201, 203, 287
Nefer-ȧri-ka-Rā (dynasty VIII), King, 208
Nefer-ḥāt, stele of, 232
Nefer-hi, statue of, 114
Nefer-ḥrȧ, statue of, 246

Nefer-ka Ḥeru, King, 208
Nefer-ka-Rā (dynasty II), 193, 286
Nefer-ka-Rā (dynasty III), 286, 290
Nefer-ka-Rā (dynasty VIII), 208
Nefer-ka-Rā (Ḥuni), 193
Nefer-ka-Rā (Pepi II), 205, 206, 287, 291
Nefer-ka-Rā (Shabaka), 300
Nefer-ka-Rā Khenṭu, King, 208
Nefer-ka-Rā Nebi, King, 208
Nefer-ka-Rā Pepi senb, King, 208
Nefer-ka-Rā Tererl, King, 208
Nefer-ka-Seker, 193, 286
Nefer-kau-Ḥeru, King, 208
Nefer-Kau-Rā, King, 208
Nefer-kau-Rā setep-en-Rā, 298
Nefer-kheper-Rā-uā-en-Rā, 295
Nefer-renpit, stele of, 239
Nefer-Sennȧ, 207
Nefert-ȧri, head of figure of, 229
Nefer-Tem, 124, 130
Nefertith, Queen of Ȧmen-ḥetep IV, 238, 295
Nefert-ithȧ, 229
Nefert-tu, stele of, 212
Negative Confession, 141
Nehȧu, 18

Neheb, 188, 286
Neilos, 9
Neith, 126, 128, 136, 161, 258;
shrine of, 262
Neka-ānkh, 205
Nekau, King, 258, 288, 300
Nekau, governor of Saïs, 258
Nekheb, 16, 205
Nekhebit, 125, 128, 191
Nekht, King, 190, 290;
papyrus of, 53
Nekhtȧ, stele of, 221
Nekht-Ȧmsu, figure of, 238
Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt, 264, 265, 289, 301;
sarcophagus of, 66
Nekht Menu, figure of, 238
Nekht-neb-f, 266, 302
Nekht-neb-ṭep-nefer, King, 210, 287
Nektanebês, 264, 289, 301
Nektanebos, 264, 289, 302
Nemareth, 253;
bracelets of, 179
Nemmes bandlet, 199
Neolithic Period, 188
Nepherites, 264
Nephthys, 125, 127, 161

Nero, 277, 279
Nes-Ȧmsu, bowl of, 256;
papyrus of, 267
Nes-Ba-neb-Ṭeṭ, 288, 298
Nesi-Khensu, 252
Nes-Qeṭiu, sarcophagus of, 262
Nessu-ba-neb-Ṭeṭ, 251
Net (Neith), 126, 128
Netchem, stele of, 231
Netchemet, 252;
papyrus of, 61
Neter-baiu, 286, 290
Neter-en, King, 191
Neter-ka-Rā, King, 208
Neterui amulet, 150
Nets, fishing, 84
Nî, 234
Night of the Drop, 14;
of the Tear, 14
Nile, the river, course of, altered, 189;
described, 7 ff.;
festivals, 14;
gods of, 8, 9;
inundation of, 13;
length of, 11;
levels, 218;
tributaries of, 13

Nile, Blue, 11
Nile, Upper, 11
Nile, Victoria, 11
Nile, White, 11
Nile boils, 73
Nile, Red Sea Canal, 258, 263
Nilus, 9
N-ka-Rā, King, 208
Nit-Ȧqert, high-priestess, 260
Nitokris, 260
Nitria, 280
Noa, 18
Nobadae, 277, 278, 283
Nome gods, list of, 16, 17
Nomes of Egypt, list of, 16, 17
Nu, 127;
papyrus of, 53, 59
Nûba, 18
Nûbî, 283
Nubia, 20, 214, 229, 234, 280;
invaded by Arabs, 283;
by Romans, 275;
kings of, 253
Nubians, 20;
funeral customs of, 276
Nub-kau-Rā, 293

Nub-kheper-Rā, 292
Nubti, 225, 294
Numbers, 180
Nunneries, 280
Nûrî, pyramids of, 170
Nut, 126, 128
Nut-ent-bȧk, 16
Nyam-Nyam, 157
Oases, the seven, 5, 140;
Christianity in, 280
Obelisk from Sinai, 222
Obelisk, the, 231
Obelisks, 105, 107, 214, 230
Obelisks of Nekht-Ḥeru-ḥebt, 265
Octavianus, 272
Offerings, Canonical list of, 90;
tablet for, 207, 222
Oil, 72
Oils, 82, 178
Omar, Khalîfa, 278
ʿOmayyad Khalîfas, 285
Omega, 282, 284
On (Heliopolis), city of, 17, 126, 145
One embracing All, 282
Oneness of God, 134, 237

Onias, 271
Onion, city of, 271
Onions, 82
Onnos, 205
Opening the Mouth, ceremony of, represented, 239
Ophthalmia, 73
Ornaments, 80 ff.
Orontes, 240, 242
Oryx, 85;
amulet, 148
Osiris, 14, 27, 123, 127;
enemies of, 143;
history of, 138;
kingdom of, 140;
resurrection of, 74
Osiris-Apis, 268
Osiris Christ, 282
Osiris-Khenti-Ȧmenti, 239
Osorkon I, 254, 288, 298
Osorkon II, 254, 288, 298
Osorkon III, 255, 288, 299
Osorkon IV, 288, 299
Ostraka, 56, 279
Ostrich feathers, 98
Osymandyas, 242
Other World, 144, 145, 208;

Book of the, 66
Ouanafre, 57
Ounaref, 56
Ox, 82
Oxen, 94
Oxyrhynchus, 16, 280;
the fish, 133
Pa-Aḥu-neb-Ȧment, 17
Pa-ȧri, tomb of, 234
Pa-Ȧsȧr, 17
Paāsh-birds, 181
Pa-Ba-neb-Ṭeṭ, 17
Pa-Bast, 17
Pachomius, 280
Pachons, month of, 183
Paḥeri, 134
Paḥomo, stele of, 283
Pai, stele of, 251
Paiānkh, 251, 288
Pai-neḥsi, stele of, 224
Painetchem I, 251, 288
Painetchem II, 251, 288
Painetchem III, 251
Pa-Khen-en-Ȧmen, 17

Palaeolithic Period, 188
P-ȧlek, 18
Palermo, stele of, 185, 188, 195
Palestine, 70, 239, 240, 253
Palette, 53, 178
Pallas, 57
Palm, a measure, 98
Palm-tree, 89
Pamȧi, 288, 299
Pa-Mātchet, 16
Pa-mer-ȧḥau, 45;
figure of, 248
Pa-neb-Ȧmt, 17
Pa-Nebset, 18
Paneḥsi, statue of, 246
Panopolis, 16, 100, 164, 280, 284
Panther, 85
Pantheism, 133
Paoni, month of, 14
Paophi, month of, 183
Papremis, 263
Papyri, painted, 110
Papyrus, the plant, 53;
amulet, 149;
cases for the dead, 162;
export of, 98

Papyrus Abbott, 250
Papyrus D’Orbiney, 248
Papyrus Harris, 250
Papyrus Mathematical, 225
Papyrus Prisse, 193
Parchment, 100
Pa-ren-nefer, stele of, 229
Pasebkhānut I, 251, 288, 298
Pasebkhānut II, 251, 288, 298
Paser, figure of, 246
Pa-ser, a chief mason, 248
Pa-ser, statue of, 235
Pasheṭ, hymn of, to Reshpu, 239;
stele of, 238
Pa-sheṭ, stele of, 229
Pa-suten-sa, shrine of, 218
Paṭ-birds, 181
Pa-Teḥuti, 17
Pa-Tem, Pa Temu, 17, 243
Patumos, 17
Pa-Uatchet, 17
Paul the Anchorite, 280
Pavilion, 249
Payni, month of, 183
Peas, 82

Pectoral, 178, 179
Pefā-Net, statue of, 260
Peḥ-Qennes, 17
Peka, 145
Pekhth, 132
Pelican, 85
Pelusium, 258, 261
Penȧ, false door of, 207
Pendants, 179
Penta-urt, poem of, 74, 242
Pepi I, 287, 291
Pepi II, 287, 291
Pepi-nekht, 30, 78, 207
Per-āa (Pharaoh), 117
Perȧbsen, King, 191, 193, 286, 290
Per-em-hru, 58
Per-em-us, 170
Persia, 86
Persians, 261, 278;
in Egypt, 262, 263
Pert, season of, 182
Pertinax, 279
Pesesh-Kef amulet, 150
Pet names, 78
Peṭā-Ȧmen-ȧpt, tomb of, 176

Peṭā-Bast, King, 31, 255, 288, 299
Peṭā-Bast, an official, stele of, 274
Peten-Ḥeru, 18
Pe-Ṭep, 267
Peter, deacon, 283
Phagrus fish, 133
Phakussa, 17
Phamenoth, month of, 183
Pharaoh, friend of, 200
Pharaoh Ḥophra, 153, 259
Pharaoh, meaning of the title, 117
Pharaoh Necho, 258
Pharaoh’s Bed, 276
Pharmuthi, month of, 183
Pharos, 269
Pharsalia, battle, 272
Philadelphus, 268, 302
Philae, island of, 7, 108, 214, 266, 268, 272, 275;
obelisk of, 45
Philip Arrhidaeus, 266, 289, 302
Philistia, 249
Philometor, 271
Philopator, 270
Phoenicia, 97
Phoenissae, 56

Phoenix, 132
Phoenix Period, 182
Physician, 101
Piānkhi, 255, 275, 288, 299;
invades Egypt, 253;
stele of, 74
Piānkhi Seneferef-Rā, 164
Pibeseth, 17
Pig, 82, 95
Pigeon, 83, 85
Pilaster, 108
Pillar, 108
Pillar-altar, 279
Pillars of the sky, 145
Pillow, 91, 98, 178
Pillow amulet, 149
Pi-Menth, 261
Pit of the tomb, 169
Pithom, 17, 243
Pithom, recorder of, 255
Planets, lists of, 71
Plague, 178
Plates, 92
Plêïnôs, stele of, 281
Plough, 96
Plumes amulet, 150

Plutarch quoted, 138
Pnups, 18
Poetry, 75
Politta, stele of, 279
Polygamy, 76
Polytheism, 133
Pomades, 82
Pomegranates, 82
Pompey, 272
Pontyris, 18
Porcelain, Egyptian, 100
Portico, 104
Portrait figures, 113
Portraits, 162
Port Sa’îd, 19
Potter, 98
Potter’s Wheel, 98, 135
Precepts of Ptaḥ-ḥetep, 68;
of Kaqemna, 68
Prescriptions, medical, 72
Priesthood, the, 119
Priest-kings, the, 251
Priests of Ȧmen-Rā, 229
Prisse papyrus, 193
Prison pyramid, 206

Proverbs, 30
Psammetichus I, 153, 258, 288, 300
Psammetichus II, 259, 288, 300
Psammetichus III, 261, 288, 300
Psamut, 264, 289, 301
Psemthek I, 258, 288, 300
Psemthek II, 259, 288, 300
Psemthek III, 261, 288, 300
P-shere-en-Ptaḥ, 274
Ptaḥ, 68, 124, 128;
temple of, at Memphis, 245
Ptaḥ-em-uȧa, stele of, 246
Ptaḥ-ḥetep, false door of, 207
Ptaḥ-ḥetep, precepts of, 30, 68, 77, 84
Ptaḥ-māi, stele of, 238
Ptaḥ-mes, stele of, 248
Ptaḥ-Nefert, 218
Ptaḥ-Sānkh, stele of, 224
Ptaḥ-Seker, 124
Ptaḥ-Seker-Ȧsȧr figures, 153
Ptaḥ-shepses, 73, 201
Ptaḥ-Socharis-Osiris, 153
Ptolemaïc Period, 268
Ptolemy I, Lagus, Soter, 266, 268, 289;
Decree of, 74
Ptolemy II, Philadelphus, 185, 268, 289

Ptolemy III, Euergetes I, 97, 179, 268, 289
Ptolemy IV, Philopator, 269, 289
Ptolemy V, Epiphanes, 236, 270, 289
Ptolemy VI, Eupator, 271, 289
Ptolemy VII, Philometor, 271, 289
Ptolemy VIII, 271, 289
Ptolemy IX, Euergetes, 271, 289
Ptolemy X, 272, 289
Ptolemy XI, 272, 289
Ptolemy XII, 272, 289
Ptolemy XIII, 272, 289
Ptolemy XIV, 272, 289
Ptolemy XV, 272, 289
Ptolemy XVI, 272, 289
Pumice-stone, 91
Pumpkins, 82
Punishment, everlasting, 144
Punt, 20, 21, 98, 204, 206;
expeditions to, 211, 215, 230
Punts, 101
Purgatory, 144
Pygmies, 87
Pygmy, 204, 206
Pylon, 105, 106
Pyramid, Ȧntef-āa, 226

Pyramid, False, 195
Pyramid, Great, 196, 197
Pyramid, meaning of the word, 170
Pyramid, Mêdûm, 195
Pyramid, Prison, 206
Pyramids of Gîzah, 196;
miniature, 239
Qā, King, 190;
pyramid, 213
Qā-ȧb-Rā setep-en-Ȧmen, 302
Qaḥa, stele of, 239, 248
Qarta, false door of, 206
Qebḥ, King, 190, 286, 290
Qebḥsennuf, 124, 129, 161
Qeḥet, 212
Qem, or Qemt, 4
Qen-nefer, figure of, 239;
statue of, 118
Qer-Ḥāpi, 7
Qerti, 141
Qeṭesh, 125, 130
Qeṭesh, relief of, 246
Quail, 85
Queen, her titles, 117

Rā, 128;
enemies of, 143;
poisoning of, 74;
worship of, 203
Rā-ȧri-en-Maāt, 302
Rachel, 283
Radassîyah, temple of, 240
Radishes, 82
Rafts, 102
Rā-Harmakhis, 124, 199
Rā-Ḥeru-Khu, 124
Rā-Ḥetep, King, 224
Rā-ḥetep of Mêdûm, 78, 111;
relief of, 203
Rā-ka-meri, King, 292
Ram of Ȧmen, 96;
of Khnemu, 96;
of Mendes, 191
Ram-god, 131
Rā-maāt-neb-meri Ȧmen, 297
Rā-meri (Pepi I), 205, 206
Rā-meri-ȧb, 291
Rā-meri-Ȧmen, 301
Rameses I, 239, 287, 296
Rameses II, 98, 218, 241-245, 252, 287, 296;
King List of, 185

Rameses III, 153, 249, 250, 288, 297
Rameses IV, 250, 288, 297
Rameses V, 153, 250, 288, 297
Rameses VI, 250, 288, 297
Rameses VII, 250, 288, 297
Rameses VIII, 250, 288, 297
Rameses IX, 250, 288, 297
Rameses X, 250, 288, 298
Rameses XI, 250, 288, 298
Rameses XII, 250, 288, 298
Ramesseum, 242, 243
Rā-neb, King, 191
Rā-nefer-tem-khu, 300
Raphia, battle of, 270
Rā-sekhent-en, 294
Rā-seshesh-ȧpu-maāt, 292
Rā-seshesh-her-ḥer-maāt, 292
Reaping, 97
Rebecca, 283
Recognition of friends in the Ṭuat, 146
Red Sea—Nile route, 98;
province of, 19
Reed-pens, 55
Reed pipe, 87
Reels, 165

Remmosh, 57
Renaissance, 115, 261
Renenet, 126, 130
Repentance, 142
Rerit, 131
Reservoir, 217
Reshpu, 124, 131, 239, 248
Re-stau, 141
Resurrection, the, 139;
amulet of, 150
Rhind Papyrus, 71
Rhinoceros, 86
Rhinocolura, 4
Righteous, rewards of, 142;
spirits and souls of, 143
Ring-money, 21, 98
Rings, finger, 179
Ritual of Embalmment, 64
River of Egypt, 9
River of the Ṭuat, 145
Rock-salt, 83
Romances, historical, 74
Rome, 270
Roof, portion of stone, 207
Ropes, 99
Rosetta Stone, 41, 270

Rosetta, temple of, 258
Rouge, 81
Royalists, 281
Rui, figure of, 248
Rumā, stele of, 241
Rutchek, a libationer, 200
Ṣâ (Tanis), 17
Sa, the, 198
Sāa-ka-nekht-kheperu-Rā, 295
Sa-Ȧmen, King, 251, 288
Sa-Ȧnḥer, stele of, 221
Sa ānkh, 223
Sabaco, 256, 288, 300
Sabben, 207
Sabina, Empress, 277
Sabinus, 279
Sacrifices, 237
Saddênga, 234
Sâḥal, island of, 14, 193
Sa-Hathor, stele of, 215
Sahidic dialect, 35
Sāḥu, 155
Saḥu-Rā, King, 201, 203, 287, 291
Sailor, the shipwrecked, 70

Saïs, 17, 136, 145, 256, 262;
kings of, 258, 264
Saïte Period, 261
Ṣaḳḳârah, pyramids and maṣṭabas of, 166, 170, 205;
step pyramid of, 193;
tablet of, 185
Salatis, King, 225
Salt, 83
Salted bodies, 161
Salûḳî dog, 86
Sam-Beḥuṭet, 17
Sa-Menthu, an official, 73
Sa-Menthu, a scribe, 215
Sa-Menthu, stele of, 211
Sammanûd, 17
Ṣân, 17;
sphinxes of, 218
Sandals, 81, 99, 143, 178
Sa-Nehat, 70
Sanekht, 286
Sānkh-ȧb-taui, King, 210
Sānkh-ka-Rā, King, 210, 292
Sānkh-taui, 223
Sapalul, 239
Sȧpi Meḥt, 17
Sȧpi-Rest, 17

Sa-Ptaḥ Mer-en-Ptaḥ, 248, 287, 297
Sara, 283
Sarâbît al-Khâdim, antiquities from, 195, 214, 215, 217, 222,
245
Sarcophagi, classes of, 177
Sa-Renput, statue of, 215, 216
Sargon, 256
Sa-ta, 132
Satet, 126
Sati, 214
Satit, 129
Satiu, 213
Saut, 16, 17
Scales, 98
Scales, the Great, 140
Scarab amulet, 147
Scarab, the heart, 177
Scarab, with human face, 223
Scarabs, 207, 220, 226, 233;
necklace of, 179
Scents, 82
Sceptre, 178
School exercises, 79
Schools, 79
Science, 71
Scorpion-god, 132

Scorpion-goddesses, the Seven, 75
Scrapers, flint, 188
Scribe, figure of the, 203
Scribe of the gods, 140
Scribes, power of the, 79;
royal, 119
Seal, Solomon’s, 282
Sea power, 249
Seasons, the three, 182
Seb, 124, 128
Sebek, 124, 131, 218
Sebek-āa, stele of, 111, 211
Sebek-āāiu, stele of, 221
Sebek-em-sa-f, King, 223
Sebekemsaf, scarab of, 179
Sebek-ḥer-ḥeb, stele of, 218
Sebek-ḥetep, cone of, 223;
stele of, 216, 217
Sebek-ḥetep, scribe of the wine-cellar, 239
Sebek-ḥetep Khā-nefer-Rā, King, 223
Sebek-ḥetep Sekhem-uatch-taui-Rā, 223
Sebek-ka-Rā, 287, 291
Sebek-neferu-Rā, 287, 293
Sebek-neferut-Rā, cylinder seal of, 219
Sebek-nekht, statue of, 111
Sebek-unnu, 214

Sebennytus, 17, 264, 266
Sebta, figure of, 119, 248
Second birth, 150
Sefekh-ābui, 126
Se-her-ȧb-Rā, 299
Seḥetep-ȧb, 211
Seḥetep-ȧb, stele of, 215
Seḥetep-ȧb-Rā, 292
Seka, 188, 286
Seker, 65, 125, 129, 153
Sekhem, 17, 156
Sekhem-ȧb, King, 191
Sekhem-ka-Rā, King, 223
Sekhem-kheper-Rā setep-en-Rā, 298
Sekhem-khu-taui-Rā, King, 224
Sekhem-uatch-taui-Rā, statue of, 115, 223
Sekhent-neb-Rā, 294
Sekhet, 126, 130, 253;
statues of, 234
Sekhet-Ȧaru, 140
Sekhet-ḥetep, 140
Sem priest, 246
Semempses, 190, 205
Semliki River, 11
Semnah, 1, 121, 216;
temple of, 257

Semsu, 190, 290
Semti, 59, 189, 193, 286, 290
Sen, King, 190, 286
Sen, coffin of, 66
Sen-ȧtef, stele of, 215
Senb, tablet for offerings of, 207
Seneferȧb-Rā, 219
Senefer-Ra, King, 208
Senefer-ka Ȧnnu, King, 208
Seneferu, 193, 195, 208, 286, 290
Seneferu, an official, 215
Seneferu, stele of, 215
Senen-en-Ptaḥ Tanen-setep-en, 301
Senmut, architect, 230
Sennaar, province of, 19
Sennacherib, 256
Sennu, false door of, 207
Senṭ, King, 191, 192, 286
Senṭȧ, King, 191, 192, 290
Sepȧ, coffin of, 146
Sepau, 212
Sepṭ, 16, 17, 184
Septimius Severus, 234, 277
Septuagint, 269
Sepulchral stelae, 68

Seqenen-Rā I Tau-āa, 226, 294
Seqenen-Rā II Tau-āa-āa, 226, 294
Seqenen-Rā III Tau-āa-qen, 226, 294
Serapeum, 258
Seraphim, 165
Serapis, 268, 272, 279
Serdâb, 169
Serpent amulet, 150;
stone, 273;
talking, 70
Serqet, 126, 161
Service books, 67
Seshesh, 16
Seshesh-kheper-Rā setep-en-Rā, 299
Sesheta, 126, 130
Sesostris (Rameses II), 241
Sesostris (Usertsen II), 215
Set, 16, 95, 125, 127, 138, 225
Set-name, 191
Seṭ-period, 181
Setau, coffin of, 251
Setau, stele of, 246
Setches, King, 193, 286
Setep-en-Rā meri Ȧmen (Philip), 302
Setep-en-Rā meri Ȧmen (Ptolemy I), 302
Sêth, 138

Seti I, 152, 153, 240, 241, 252, 255;
King List of, 185;
plan of tomb of, 174
Seti II Mer-en-Ptaḥ, 245, 248, 296
Set-nekht, King, 234, 248, 249
Settu-Rā, 301
Seven years’ famine, 166
Sewênêh, 1
Shaȧru, father of Cheops, 196, 286
Shabaka, 68, 256, 288, 300
Shabataka, 257, 300
Shablûkah cataract, 13
Shabti figure, 152
Shadow, 156
Shâdûf, 89, 96
Shāit en Sensen, 62
Shâmbî, 277
Sharkîyah, 18
Sharuhen, 228
Shashanq I, 253, 288, 298
Shashanq II, 288, 299
Shashanq III, 289, 299
Shashanq IV, 255, 289, 299
Shashanq, an official, 115, 273
Shashanq, high-priest, 254
Shas-ḥetep, 16

Shasu, 240;
governors of, 224
Shat, season of, 182
Sheep, 22, 82, 95
Sheets, padded linen, 90
Shêkh al-Balad, statue of, 203
Shemu, season of, 182
Shen amulet, 150
Shennu, 117, 191
Shep-en-Ȧpt I, 256
Shep-en-Ȧpt II, 256
Shepherd kings, 224, 225
Shepherds, dynasties of, 222, 223
Shepseskaf, King, 201, 287, 289
Shepses-ka-Rā, 203, 287, 291
Shepuit, 131
Sherȧ, a Ka-priest, 192, 193
Sheshȧ, stele of, 198
Shesmu, 144
Sheta, 132
Shield, green slate, 191, 195;
with badge, 120
Shirt, 81, 120
Shishak, 179, 253, 288, 298
Shrine, 106, 272
Shu, 128

Shutarna, 233
Shutb, 16
Sickle, 97
Silko, 278
Silurus, 133
Silver rings, 179
Sinai, peninsula of, 4, 203, 205, 206, 208, 210, 214, 217, 219,
222, 240;
conquest of, 195
Sin, 140-142
Sins, the Forty-two, 142
Singing, 31
Sirius, 184
Sistrum, 87, 178
Siut, 209
Sîwah, Oasis of, 5
Six, Great House of, 207
Skeletons of pygmies, 205
Skemiophris, 219
S-khā-en-Rā meri Ȧmen, 297
Skins of animals, 98
Skulls of Egyptians, 158
Sma amulet, 150
Sma-taui, 211
Smendes, 251, 298
Smen-Ḥeru, 16

Smer, 118
Smerkha, King, 190, 286
Smer-uāt, 118
Smeṭsmeṭ, 262
Snake god, 132
S-netchem-ȧb-Rā, 301
So, 256
Sobat, river, 13
Soil of Egypt, 4
Soldiers, equipment of, 120
Soleb, temple of, 231, 232
Solomon, 95, 253;
seal of, 282
Solum, gulf of, 4
Somaliland, 21
Somerset, river, 11
Son of Rā name, 117, 203
Song of Ȧntuf, 75
Song of the Harper, 28, 75
Songs, 75
Soter, 268, 302
Sothic Period, 182, 184;
Year, 182, 184
Sothis, 184, 186
Soul, 156;
symbolized by the heart, 140

Sow, 96
Sowing of crops, 96
Sparrow, 85
Spear, 178
Spells, 31
Sphinx, 198, 199;
repaired, 277;
sand cleared from, 232;
temple of the, 104
Sphinx (Thothmes III), 231
Sphinxes, 105;
avenue of, 230;
from Ṣân, 218
Spice, 83, 98
Spinach, 82
Spindle whorls, 165
Spindles, 165
Spirit, 156
Spirits, 133;
Land of, 204
Spoons, 92
Spring, 183
Staff, inscribed, 178;
of office, 81
Staircase to tombs, 173
Stars, 145

Statues for the Ka, 177
Statues painted, 110, 113
Stele of 400 years, 225;
of the dream, 258
Stelae, sepulchral, 220
Step pyramid, 166, 193
Steps amulet, 150
Steps, god of the, 189
Stibium, 81
Stick, walking, 81
Stole, 164
Stomach, god of, 161
Stone-cutting, 191
Stonemason, 100
Stools, 91, 178
Strabo quoted, 11, 13, 242
Succoth, 17
Sûdân, 73, 204, 205, 206, 221, 228, 230, 237, 239, 240, 262;
conquests of, 195, 213, 283;
Roman centurions in, 277;
the, 13 nomes of, 17
Sûdân, Modern, provinces of, 19
Suez, 19, 98;
isthmus of, 22;
Canal, 6, 259
Ṣûhâḳ, 18;

church of, 284;
dialect of, 35
Ṣulb, 232, 234, 235;
temple of, 231
Summer, 183
Sun amulet, 149
Sundial, 72, 273
Sunk-relief, 110
Sunnu, 1
Sunrise, mountain of, 145
Sunset, mountain of, 145
Sunt, 1
Superstition, 32
Sururu, stele of, 234
Suser-en-Rā, King, 226, 294
Sutekh, 131, 225, 226
Suten-ȧbu, relief of, 194
Suten Bȧt name, 116
Suten-ḥenen, 16, 209;
princes of, 208
Suten rekh title, 221
Suten ṭā ḥetep prayer, 220, 221
Suti, 225
Sutui, an architect, 239
Swallow, 85
Swallow-goddess, 132

Sweetmeats, 82
Swine, 82
Syene, 1, 172, 206, 268, 275, 285
Syncellus, the, 264
Syria, 71, 240;
wars in, 229, 232;
garrisons of, 237
Syrups, 82
Ta-ȧḥet, Oasis of, 5
Tabah, 4
Tables, 91, 178
Tablet of Ṣaḳḳârah, 71, 185
Tablet for offerings, 169
Tablets of Abydos, 71, 185
Tablets, sepulchral, 177
Tachos, 266
Taenterert, 16
Tafnekht I, 288
Tafnekht II, 288
Taharqa, 257, 288, 300
Tail, 81
Tails of animals worn by men, 21
Ta-Kens, 16
Ta-Kenset, 216
Ta-Khart-Ȧst, statue of, 261

Takhauath, 260
Tale of the two brothers, 69, 70
Tall al-Maskhûṭah, 17, 243
Tall Basṭah, 17
Tambourine, 87
Ta-Merȧ, 4
Tandamanie, 257, 258
Tanis, 17, 216, 225, 243, 252;
sphinxes of, 218
Tanḳâsi, pyramids of, 170
Ṭanṭa, 18
Tanuath-Ȧmen, 257, 258, 288, 300
Tashermut, a priestess, 273
Tasheṭ-Khensu, 254
Tasitia, 18
Taskmasters, 151
Ṭāṭā-āa, stele of, 248
Ta-tenen, 130
Tati-ānkef, stele of, 219
Tattoo markings, 82
Tȧu, 188, 286
Tau-āa (Seqenen-Rā I), 226, 294
Tau-āa-āa (Seqenen-Rā II), 226, 294
Tau-āa-qen (Seqenen-Rā III), 226, 294
Ta-Uatchet, 18

Taurt (Thoueris), 126, 131
Taxes levied by priests, 250
Tcha, King, 189
Tchaa, stele of, 216
Tchal, 17
Tchat, 117
Tchatchai, 193, 286
Tchatchaiu, 151
Tchefau-em-sa-f I, 205, 291
Tchefau-em-sa-f II, 291
Tcheḥrȧ, 266, 289, 302
Tchekā, 17
Tcheser, 14, 166, 193, 286
Tcheser-ka-Rā, 294
Tcheser-kheperu-Rā setep-en-Rā, 296
Tcheser-sa, King, 193
Tcheser-Tcheseru, 230
Tcheser-Tetȧ, King, 193
Tchesertetȧ, 290
Tchesti, Oasis of, 5
Ṭeb, 16
Ṭeben, a measure, 98
Ṭebu, 16
Tefnut, 128
Teḥuti, 17, 125, 128

Teḥuti-āa, stele of, 224
Teḥuti-ḥetep, wall paintings of, 222
Teḥutimes, stele of, 239
Teḥuti-sat, 164
Tell al-Amarna, tablets of, 113, 236
Tell al-Yahûdîyyah, 250
Temple, the, 104
Temu, 129, 258
Ten, 16
Ṭen, King, 189, 286
Ṭenȧt, a measure, 98
Tenȧuit, 219
Teni, 16
Ṭenḳ (pygmy), 204
Tentyris, 16
Teôs, 266, 289
Ṭep-Ȧḥet, 16
Terenouthis, 268
Tes-Ḥeru, 16
Ṭeṭ, 125
Ṭeṭ amulet, 149
Tetȧ (dynasty I), 189
Tetȧ (dynasty II), 286
Tetȧ (dynasty VI), 205
Tetȧ (Ḥen-nekht), 286, 290

Tetȧ-Kharṭ, Queen, 113, 114
Tetȧ Mer-en Ptaḥ, 287, 291
Ṭeṭ-f-Rā, King, 199, 286, 290
Ṭeṭ-ka-Rā, King, 208
Ṭeṭ-ka-Rā Ȧssȧ, 203, 287, 291
Ṭeṭ-kau-Rā, 300
Ṭeṭun, 129
Teucharis, 283
That-I-em-ḥetep, stele of, 29, 274
Thebaïd, 269, 279
Thebans, 209
Thebes, 16, 216, 226;
high priest of, 119;
princes of, 208, 209;
sacked, 258;
triad of, 234
Theb-neter, 17
Thekaut, 17
Thekeleth I, 254, 288, 298
Thekeleth II, 255, 256, 288, 299
Thekeleth III, 288, 299
Thent-Kheta, 260
Theodosius, 278
Thesh, 188, 286
Thethȧ, 200;
relief of, 205;

stele of, 210
Thet-taui, 213
Thi, Queen, 233-236, 295
This, city of, 16, 188
Thoth, god, inventor of writing, 55, 75, 128, 135, 139, 140, 183,
196
Thoth, the Twice-Great, 265
Thothmes I, 229, 287, 294
Thothmes II, 230, 287, 294
Thothmes III, 164, 179, 230, 231, 287, 295
Thothmes IV, 198, 232, 287, 295
Thoueris, 126
Threshing floor, 97
Thuȧa, 233
Thunurei, 71
Thuthu, stele of, 238
Thuthu, stele and libation tank of, 239
Tiberius, 277
Tiles, glazed, 193
Time, divisions of, 181
Timekeepers, 151
Timsaḥ, lake, 5
Tin, 98
Tirhâḳâh, 257, 288, 300
Tmai al Amdîd, 17
Tnouba, 56

Tôf, 102
Toilet box, 178;
requisites, 91
Tomb of Osymandyas, 242
Tomb, the pyramid, 166;
the maṣṭaba, 167;
the rock-hewn, 172;
endowment of, 175;
equipment, 178
Tombs of the kings, 173 ff., 231
Top-dressing, 151
Toys, 78, 101, 178
Trade, 97
Trajan, 279
Travel, 69
Tree of life, 143
Tree-trunk amulet, 149
Triads, 123
Troïs, 283
Ṭuamutef, 125, 129, 161
Ṭuat, or Other World, 145
Tûlûnid Khalîfas, 285
Tumblers, 87
Ṭura, quarries of, 198, 213, 217
Turin Papyrus, 71, 185
Turquoise, 215

Turquoise mines, 204
Turtle-god, 132
Tushratta, 98, 233, 236
Tut-i-em-ḥetep, 39
Tutānkh-Ȧmen, 235, 238, 287, 296
Two-horns, 142
Tybi, month of, 183
Uaḥ-ȧb-Rā (Ḥophra), 153, 288, 300
Uaḥ-ȧb-Rā, statue of, 261
Uaḥ-ānkh, King, 210, 292
Uaḥ-ka-Rā (Bocchoris), 299
Uaḥt-rest, Oasis of, 5
Uamemti, 142
Uasarken I, 254, 288, 298
Uasarken II, 217, 218, 254, 288, 298
Uasarken III, 255, 288, 299
Uasarken IV, 288, 299
Uast, 16
Uatch-ȧnt, 188, 286
Uatchet, 16, 126, 128
Uatch-kheper-Rā, 294
Uatch-nār, 188, 286
Uatchnes, King, 191, 286
Uauaiu, 213

Uḥem-ȧb-Rā, 300
Ukhedu disease, 190
Umm Darmân, 4
Unȧ, 120, 206
Unȧs, King, 203, 205, 287, 291;
legend of, 74
Unguents, 178
Unt, 16
Unu-Ȧmen, travels of, 70
Upholsterer, 100
Upper Nile, province of, 19
Ur, 199
Uraeus, 179
Ur-ȧri-en-Ptaḥ, maṣṭaba of, 170, 207
Ur-ḥeka, 65
Ur-kherp-ḥem, 119, 274
Ur-maau, 119
Urt-Ḥekau, 126
User, stele of, 212
User-en-Rā, 203, 204
User-en-Rā Ȧn, 287, 291
Userkaf, King, 201, 203, 205, 287, 291
Userka-Rā, King, 205
Userka-Rā Ȧti, 287
Usertsen I, 73, 172, 213, 287, 293

Usertsen II, 172, 215, 287, 293
Usertsen III, 73, 115-117, 121, 172, 216, 217, 255, 257, 287,
293
Usertsen IV, 219, 287, 293
Usertsen, a prince, 222
Usertsen-senbu, stele of, 218
Ushabti figure, 152, 177
Usr-ka-Rā meri Ȧmen, 302
Usr-kheperu-Rā meri Ȧmen, 296
Usr-maāt-Rā Ȧmen-meri setep-en-Rā, 297
Usr-maāt-Rā khu-en-Ȧmen, 297
Usr-maāt-Rā-s-kheper-en-Rā, 297
Usr-maāt-Rā setep-en-Ȧmen (Rameses III), 297
Usr-maāt-Rā setep-en-Ȧmen (Rameses IV), 297
Usr-maāt-Rā setep-en-Rā Ȧmen (Osorkon II), 298
Usr-maāt-Rā setep-en-Ȧmen (Pamȧi), 299
Usr-maāt-Rā setep-en-Rā (Rameses II), 296
Usr-maāt-Rā setep-en-Rā (Shishak III), 299
Usr-Rā-setep-en-Ptaḥ, 301
Utcha-ḥer-resenet, 262, 263
Utchat amulet, 149
Uthenȧa, false door of, 207
Valley of the Acacia, 70
Vegetables, 82
Veil, 77

Vespasian, 279
Vessels, funerary, 178
Victor, a priest, 56
Victor, 283
Victoria Nyanza, 11
Vines, 89
Vulture, 85;
amulet, 149;
goddess, 132
Wâd Bâ-Nagaa, 231
Wâdî al-Ḥamâr cataract, 13
Wâdî Ḥalfah, 4, 214, 216, 240
Wâdî Ḥalfah camp, 4
Wâdî Ḥammâmât, 22, 204, 206
Wâdî Maghârah, 195, 196, 203, 214
Wâdî Ulâḳî, 240, 243
Warburton, 44
Watchers, 144
Water-fowl, 180
Water-melons, 82
Water supply, 90
Wax, used for magical figures, 31
Wax figures, 67
Weaving, art of, 99
Weights, 98

Weston, 44
Wheat, 22, 82
White Crown, 190
White Nile, province of, 19
Whorls, 165
Wicked, annihilation of, 144
Wife, status of, 77
Wigs, 81, 101
Wild-dog, 85
Winding-sheet, 164
Window, 273
Wine, 83
Wine, imperishable, 143
Wine-jars, sealings of, 189
Winnowing of grain, 97
Winter, 183
Witches, 31
Wolf, 85
Wolf-god, 132
Wood-carver, 101
Wool-work, 165
Words of power, 31, 149
Writing, 22
Writing, art of, introduced, 194
Writing reeds, 53

Xerxes I, the Great, 263, 267, 288, 301
Xoïs, 17, 222
Year, the calendar, 184;
the lunar, 182;
the primitive, 182;
the solar, 182;
the Sothic, 182;
the vague, 184
Young, Thomas, 44, 270
Zaêl, 57
Zaḳâzîḳ, 18
Zâwyet al-ʿAryân, pyramids of, 170
Zedekiah, 259, 260
Zobah, 253
Zodiac, 71
Zoëga, 44
Zûma, pyramids of, 170

PUBLICATIONS
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF EGYPTIAN AND ASSYRIAN
ANTIQUITIES.
THE BOOK OF THE DEAD.
P P N in the British Museum. 1876.
HOTOGRAPHS OF THE APYRUS OF EBSENI
Unmounted 2l. 2s. (Mounted copies and copies in portfolios may
be obtained on special terms.)
T P A, B D. Facsimile. Second edition.
HE APYRUS OF NI THE OOK OF THE EAD
1894. Fol. Portfolio or half bound. 2l. 10s.
T P A, B D. The Egyptian Text, with
HE APYRUS OF NI THE OOK OF THE EAD
interlinear transliteration and translation, a running translation,
introduction, etc. By E. A. Wallis Budge, Litt. D. 1895. 4to. 1l.
10s.
F P H, Ȧ, K, N, with
ACSIMILES OF THE APYRI OF UNEFER NHAI ERASHER AND ETCHEMET
supplementary text from the Papyrus of Nu. With transcripts,
translations, etc. By E. A. Wallis Budge, Litt. D. 1899. Fol. 2l. 10s.
E T E P, from the coffin of Āmamu. 32
GYPTIAN EXTS OF THE ARLIEST ERIOD
coloured plates. 1886. Fol. 2l. 2s.
EGYPTIAN PAPYRI, ETC.
F R M P in the British Museum. 21
ACSIMILE OF THE HIND ATHEMATICAL APYRUS
plates. 1898. Fol. 18s.
I H D C. 1868. Fol. 1l. 7s. 6d.
NSCRIPTIONS IN THE IERATIC AND EMOTIC HARACTER

C G T C P, from Ostraka, Stelae,
OPTIC AND REEK EXTS OF THE HRISTIAN ERIOD
etc., in the British Museum. By H. R. Hall. 100 plates. 1905.
Foolscap. 2l.
BABYLONIAN AND ASSYRIAN TEXTS, ETC.
I C C, from Assyrian M
NSCRIPTIONS IN THE UNEIFORM HARACTER ONUMENTS
discovered by A. H. Layard, D. C. L. 1851. Fol. 1l. 1s.
T C I W A, Vol. III. Prepared for
HE UNEIFORM NSCRIPTIONS OF ESTERN SIA
publication by Major-General Sir H. C. Rawlinson, K. C. B.,
assisted by George Smith, Department of Antiquities, British
Museum. 1870. Fol. 1l.
T S I D G R
HE CULPTURES AND NSCRIPTION OF ARIUS THE REAT ON THE OCK OF
B, P. A new collation of the Persian, Susian, and
EHISTÛN IN ERSIA
Babylonian Texts, with English translation, plates, etc. 1907.
8vo. 1l.
C T F B T, etc., in the British Museum.
UNEIFORM EXTS ROM ABYLONIAN ABLETS
Parts I.-V., VII.-XXIII., 50 plates each; Part VI., 49 plates. 1896-
1906. Foolscap. 7s. 6d. each part. Part XXIV. 50 plates. 1908.
Foolscap. 10s.
A K A. Cuneiform Texts, with translations, etc.
NNALS OF THE INGS OF SSYRIA
By E. A. Wallis Budge, Litt. D., and L. W. King, M. A. Vol. I. 1903.
4to. 1l.
P B T (Sp. 3, 2). 1895. 1s. 6d.
HOTOGRAPH OF A ABYLONIAN ABLET
T T -A T B M. Autotype Plates.
HE ELL EL MARNA ABLETS IN THE RITISH USEUM
1892. 8vo. 1l. 8s.
C C T K C. By C. Bezold.
ATALOGUE OF UNEIFORM ABLETS IN THE OUYUNJIK OLLECTION
Vol. I., 8vo, 1889, 15s.; Vol. II., 8vo, 1891, 15s.; Vol. III., 8vo,
1894, 15s.; Vol. IV., 8vo, 1896, 1l.; Vol. V., 8vo, 1899, 1l. 3s.
GUIDE BOOKS.

G E C. With 53 plates and 180 illustrations.
UIDE TO THE GYPTIAN OLLECTIONS
1909. 8vo. 1s.
G F S E R. With 32 plates and 28
UIDE TO THE IRST AND ECOND GYPTIAN OOMS
illustrations. Second edition. 1904. 8vo. 1s.
G T F E R. With 8 plates and 131
UIDE TO THE HIRD AND OURTH GYPTIAN OOMS
illustrations. 1904. 8vo. 1s. 6d.
G B A C. 2nd edition. With 45
UIDE TO THE ABYLONIAN AND SSYRIAN OLLECTIONS
plates and 45 illustrations. 1908. 8vo. 1s.
HIMYARITIC&PHOENICIAN INSCRIPTIONS.
I P C, discovered on the site of
NSCRIPTIONS IN THE HOENICIAN HARACTER
Carthage during researches by Nathan Davis, 1856-58. 1863.
Fol. 1l. 5s.
I H C, discovered chiefly in Southern
NSCRIPTIONS IN THE IMYARITIC HARACTER
Arabia. 1863. Fol. 1l. 4s.